Chapter # 13
Nutrition: Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet
Know how different fats affect your health
Learn how healthy fats in your diet keep your heart healthy
You Will Learn:
1) The role of healthy fats in the body and identify food sources that can lower your blood cholesterol
2) To identify foods that have unsaturated, saturated and trans fats
3) How much saturated fat you are eating each day
4) To identify how to lower your triglyceride levels
5) How added sugar affects your body
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 100
What are Fats?
Fats are also called 'fatty acids' or 'lipids.' Fatty acids or lipids in our body exist as three molecules put together, known as triglycerides. Most of the fat we need for life is made by the body. Some fats can only be received from our diet. These fats are known as essential fats because it is essential that we get them from food. Essential fats include Omega-3 fats.
Why Is Fat Important?
Getting enough fat in your diet is important for overall health. Restricting fat intake to very, very low levels is not recommended. We need fat for the following reasons:
’éĘ To absorb vitamins such as, vitamins A, D, E and K
’éĘ To keep our skin healthy
’éĘ To make sure we get enough essential fats (e.g., Omega-3) that are important for heart health
’éĘ Healthy fats (e.g., unsaturated fats from plant oils) can help lower LDL (lousy) cholesterol in your body
’éĘ Fat adds flavor to food and keeps you feeling satisfied longer after a meal
What is Cholesterol?
Cholesterol is a wax-like substance found in the body. Our bodies need cholesterol:
’éĘ To make vitamin D
’éĘ To make male and female hormones (testosterone and estrogen)
’éĘ To keep cell membranes (e.g., the wall that lines the cell) in our body healthy
Eating foods high in saturated and trans fat leads to more LDL (lousy) cholesterol in the body.
LDL cholesterol slowly builds up along the walls of the arteries. Over time, this can lead to plaque buildup that can narrow the space in our arteries. When blood is not able to flow to the heart or the brain, the result is a heart attack or stroke.
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 101
How Much Fat Do You Need?
The Heart and Stroke Foundation and the American Heart Association recommend that less than 30% of our energy (calorie intake) comes from total fat. Saturated fat (the less healthy type of fat) should not be more than 7% of total calories. Saturated fats raise LDL (lousy) cholesterol in the body.
30% Calories from TOTAL fat 7% Calories from SATURATED fat
What Does % of Calories Mean?
Recommendations for the amount of total and saturated fat will be different for each person depending on age, gender and activity level. The following chart gives you a guide based on certain calorie levels.
Recommended Daily Recommended Maximum
Daily Calories
Total Fat Intake Daily Saturated Fat Intake
Men
1800 - 2000 60 - 65g* 14 -15.5g**
Women
1500-1700 50 - 56g* 11.5 - 13g**
* Calculation: Number of calories per day x 30%=calories from TOTAL fat ├Ę 9 calories/gram of fat= amount of TOTAL fat in grams for the day. Example: 1800 calories x 30%=540 ├Ę 9 =
60g
**Calculation: Number of calories per day x 7%=calories from saturated fat ├Ę 9 calories/gram of fat= amount of saturated fat in grams for the day. Example: 1500 calories x 7%=126 ├Ę 9 =
14g
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 102
Types of Fat
There are three main types of fat found in the foods you eat:
Total Fat
1. Unsaturated Fats 2. Saturated Fats 3. Trans Fats
(Commercially Prepared,
(Plant Foods) (Animal Foods) Processed)
1) Unsaturated Fats
’éĘ Found in plant foods and oils
’éĘ Healthy fats, but should be eaten in moderation
’éĘ 2 types: mono-unsaturated fats and poly-unsaturated fats
See table on next page for examples of mono and poly unsaturated foods:
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 103
MONO-unsaturated Fats/Oils POLY-unsaturated Fats/Oils
’éĘ Lower (Ōåō) LDL (lousy) cholesterol in ’éĘ Lower (Ōåō) LDL (lousy) cholesterol in your body your body
’éĘ Increase (Ōåæ) HDL (healthy) ’éĘ Omega-3 fats: Increase (Ōåæ) HDL cholesterol in your body and lower (Ōåō) triglycerides
’éĘ Examples are: ’éĘ Examples are:
- olive oil and olives - walnuts
- canola oil - ground flaxseed & flaxseed oil
- natural peanut butter - hemp seed/hemp hearts
- peanut oil and peanuts - chia seed/salba seed
- avocado - canola oil
- almonds - fatty fish: mackerel, salmon, unsalted herring, sardines (fresh
- cashews or canned), trout.
2) Saturated Fats
’éĘ Raise (Ōåæ) LDL (lousy) cholesterol in your body
’éĘ Found mostly in all animal products and tropical oils such as: cocoa butter, palm oil, coconut and coconut oil, palm kernel oils
’éĘ All animal products have cholesterol
See table on next page for examples of foods high in saturated fat:
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 104
Foods High in Saturated Fat Changes You Can Make
Marbled or fatty meats: Choose leaner meats:
’éĘ Corned beef, brisket, regular ’éĘ Beef: round, sirloin, chuck or loin;
lamb: leg, arm or loin; pork:
’éĘ Ground beef, short or spare ribs tenderloin, leg or shoulder; veal: all
’éĘ Skin on chicken and turkey, chicken trimmed cuts; extra lean ground wings beef
’éĘ Replace luncheon meats with low
’éĘ Bacon (all kinds) sodium canned fish or
’éĘ Sausages chicken/turkey packed in water
’éĘ Remove the skin from chicken and
’éĘ Goose or duck turkey
’éĘ Breaded or battered foods ’éĘ Eat a smaller amount of meat
’éĘ Eat meat less often. Cook with dried
’éĘ High fat luncheon meats peas, beans & lentils or with tofu and fish
High fat dairy foods Lower fat dairy products
’éĘ Whole milk (3.5%) ’éĘ Cheeses with less than 15% M.F.
’éĘ High fat cheeses with more than ’éĘ 1% or skim milk
20% M.F. (milk fat)
’éĘ Low fat plain or fat-free, low sugar
’éĘ Yogurts with more than 2% M.F fruit yogurt
’éĘ Butter ’éĘ Consider non-hydrogenated margarine, olive oil or avocado as a
’éĘ Cream (any type) spread
3) Trans Fats
’éĘ Raise (Ōåæ) LDL (lousy) and lower (Ōåō) HDL (healthy) cholesterol in your body
’éĘ Trans fats are also called partially hydrogenated vegetable oil or shortening
What Are Trans Fats?
’éĘ Trans fats are produced when a healthy fat (e.g., oil) undergoes a chemical process known as partial hydrogenation
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 105
’éĘ Food manufacturers add hydrogen atoms (hence the term hydrogenation) to a healthy oil (e.g., soybean, canola or olive). This process allows the liquid oil to become a solid and hard fat
’éĘ Hydrogenation prevents separation of the fat. It can also improve the texture and consistency of the product. Consider natural peanut butter. Natural peanut butter needs to be stirred before spreading. The oil separates from the crushed nuts, which you do not see with regular peanut butter
’éĘ Read the Ingredients List on the food label for partially hydrogenated or hydrogenated oils/fats. This is a clue that trans fat is in the product
Foods With Trans Fats Changes You Can Make
Found mostly in commercially Replace commercially prepared, prepared, processed food items: processed foods with healthy choices:
’éĘ Crackers and cookies ’éĘ Fruit and 1Ōüä4 cup unsalted nuts
’éĘ Cakes, pie crusts, pastries, donuts ’éĘ Raw veggies and hummus
’éĘ Vegetable shortening, hard ’éĘ Low fat, low sugar yogurt margarine ’éĘ Whole grain crackers and low fat
’éĘ French fries, potato and corn chips ricotta cheese
’éĘ Deep-fried restaurant or fast foods
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 106
Example of a high fat meal compared to a lower fat meal:
Food Amount Total Fat (g) Saturated Fat
(g)
Fried Chicken 4 oz 23 6
(100g)
High fat meal: French Fries 2.5 oz 11 1.5
Total fat: 99g Caesar Salad Side 20 4
Order
Saturated fat: 33g
Whole Milk 1 cup 9 6
(250 mL)
Apple Pie 1 slice 19 4.7
(1/8 pie)
Ice Cream 1 scoop 17 11
(1/2 cup)
Food Amount Total Fat (g) Saturated
Fat (g)
Roasted Chicken 4 oz 4 1
(100g)
Healthy meal: Baked Potato + 1 potato 1 0.5
Low Fat Sour 1Tbsp sour
Total fat: 21g Cream cream
Green salad with 2 tsp oil 9 1
Saturated fat: 7g olive oil (10 mL)
1% Milk 1 cup 2 1.5
(250mL)
Baked Apple 1 0 0
Low Fat Frozen 1 scoop 4.5 2.5
Yogurt (1/2 cup)
Lowering Triglycerides
’éĘ Triglycerides are a type of fat in your blood. They are referred to as storage fat.
’éĘ When we eat more calories than our body needs for energy, the body converts these extra calories into triglycerides
’éĘ High triglyceride levels can raise the risk of heart disease and increase your risk of heart attack
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 107
’éĘ A safe target for triglycerides is: less than 1.7 mmol/L; (mmol/L is the unit of measure used to measure cholesterol and triglyceride levels in Canadian laboratories)
’éĘ My value is: ____________ mmol/L
Improve Triglyceride Levels By:
Lifestyle Changes Reason Examples
1. Reducing your intake ’éĘ A diet high in simple - candy - soda pop of sugars, sweets and sugars and refined carbohydrates raises - desserts - sweet drinks refined, processed triglycerides carbohydrates
-pastries - juice
- jams/jellies/syrup - chocolate
- honey - crackers
- white rice
- white flour foods, e.g. white bread
2. Reducing alcohol - Drinking too much alcohol - beer - whisky intake will increase triglyceride
- liqueurs - rum levels, especially if mixed with juices or regular soda
- wine - brandy pop
- champagne - mixed drinks
- gin
3. Eating fish more often. - Fish high in Omega-3 can: - salmon - flounder - trout
Aim to eat fatty fish 2-3 - Lower triglyceride levels - halibut - haddock - bass times a week.
- Reduce blood clotting - mackerel - red snapper - tuna
- Prevent heart attacks Others sources of Omega-3 fats:
- Reduce the risk of - walnuts - canola oil - spinach irregular heartbeat
- flax seed (ground) - flax seed oil
- soy and soy-based products
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 108
Lifestyle Changes Reason Examples
4. Decreasing total fat and - A diet high in saturated and - fast foods - butter trans fat intake trans fat will thicken the
- high fat cheese - croissants blood and increase the chance of clotting
- fried foods - chocolate
- bacon - sausages
- shortening (vegetable)
- deli meats - margarine
- mayonnaise
- convenience foods e.g., hot dogs, hamburger helpers or macaroni and cheese
- pastries, cookies, ice cream, desserts
Added Sugars
’éĘ The American Heart Association defines "added sugars" as the sugars and syrups added to foods during the processing or preparation. The sugars and syrups that are added at the table are also added sugars
’éĘ Sugars that are locked in and naturally found in foods such as fruit, vegetables, milk and whole grains are healthy choices. These foods are recommended as part of a healthy diet
’éĘ High sugar intake from added sugars is linked to high triglyceride levels. High triglyceride levels in the blood increase the risk of diabetes and heart disease
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 109
’éĘ The World Health Organization, the Canadian Diabetes Association and the
American Heart Association recommend adults consume less than 10% of total calories from added or free sugars o For women, this would mean having no more than 100 calories or 6
teaspoons from added sugars each day o For men, this means having no more than 150 calories or 9 teaspoons from added sugars per day o 1 teaspoon has 4 grams of sugar
Note: The information on food labels includes
TOTAL sugars per serving in a product. This means that the number you see for 'Sugars' on a food label includes the amount of sugar that is naturally present in foods AND added sugars.
This makes it hard to know how much added sugars there are in foods and drinks.
Sugar Appears in Many Different Forms:
- -
’éĘ Molasses Fruit puree Liquid sugar
- -
’éĘ Honey Juice Invert sugar
- -
’éĘ Agave Cane sugar Dextrin
- -
’éĘ Sucrose Maple syrup Sugar beets
- -
’éĘ Dextrose Brown sugar Glucose-fructose
- -
’éĘ Anhydrous dextrose High fructose corn syrup Brown rice syrup
- -
’éĘ Malt syrup Fruit-juice concentrate Cane syrup
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 110
How Can I Reduce the Amount of Added Sugars In My Diet?
’éĘ Replace sugary drinks (e.g., regular soda, iced tea, juices, fruit drinks, sports drinks, energy drinks, etc.) with water, unsweetened herbal tea, reduced fat milk or unsweetened soy, rice or almond milk
’éĘ Add flavour to foods by using spices (e.g., ginger, cinnamon, nutmeg, vanilla extract) instead of sugar
’éĘ Choose plain yogurt instead of fruit or flavoured sweetened yogurt. Add fresh fruit, such as berries or chopped apple, to plain yogurt and breakfast cereals or oatmeal instead of sugar
’éĘ Read labels and the ingredients list. Choose breakfast cereals with no more than 6
grams of sugar per serving. Look for cereals with no added sugar. Buy unsweetened non-dairy milks, unflavoured instant cereals and tinned fruit in its own juice (versus syrup)
’éĘ Reduce sugar in recipes. You can cut the amount of sugar in a recipe by half for most baked goods. Substitute unsweetened applesauce for sugar in recipes (use equal amounts)
Your Resources
1) See the Nutrition Tool Box for sugar content found in common foods
2) Eat Right Ontario: www.ontario.ca/eatright
3) Call 1-877-510-5102 to talk to a Registered Dietitian for free.
4) Heart and Stroke Foundation: www.heartandstroke.ca
5) Dietitians of Canada: www.dietitians.ca
6) Health Canada (Food Guide, Label Reading): www.healthycanadians.gc.ca
Chapter 13 - Fats, Cholesterol & Your Diet pg. 111