FATS:

SATURATED AND UNSATURATED

Fats on the label
On a nutrition label, total fat includes saturated, polyunsaturatedand monounsaturatedfats.
Fats come in different forms
A C=C double bond:
chemists call this a unit of unstaturation If some fatty acids are saturated, what are they saturated with?
Saturated, monounsaturated and polyunsaturatedfatty acids can all be used to make triglycerides. A single triglyceride can
What do the prefixes be made of fatty acid mono-and poly-tell you chains of all of one about the unsaturation?
type (e.g. all saturated) or a mixture of types
Unsaturations saturated with H
Making a C=C double bond here, required removing two H atoms.
unsaturated wrtH
Double bonds come in different types
Fatty acids can have double bonds between carbon atoms. Double bonds come in two main types.
The double bond between the carbons fixesall the atoms in place - in effect, the 4 atoms attached to the doubly bonded carbons are stuck there. This is in contrast to singly bonded atoms, which are able to rotate freely.
Since these atoms are fixed in space, we can think of the double bond as having two "sides".
What is the difference between the two types of double bonds?
Chemists refer to these two types of double bonds as cis and trans.
Fats on the label
Saturated fatis referring to the composition of the fatty acid chains that make up the triglycerides.
Triglycerides from different food sources
Source Fatty acids in triglycerides are... Physical appearance
Animal triglycerides
50% Saturated, 50% unsaturated
(e.g. butter, lard, Solid (fat)
(1-5% of the unsaturated is trans) tallow from cow, pig etc)
Cis unsaturated and some Fish triglycerides polyunsaturated Liquid (oil)
(e.g. fish oil)
(contain omega-3 fatty acids)
Plant triglycerides
85% Cis unsaturated and
(e.g. peanut oil, olive oil, Liquid (oil) polyunsaturated, 15% saturated corn oil)
Liquid fat vs. Solid fat
Three saturated fatty acid chains could make a fully saturated triglyceride
(when combined with glycerol).
long tube-shaped
Three saturated fatty acid fatty acids can stack chains shown in a space filling closely together in a model. This representation triglyceride shows how much space the actual atoms would take up.
The straight tube-like structure of the saturated fatty acid means it can stack closely with another saturated fatty acid in a triglyceride.
Van Der Waals (VDW) attractions
Hydrophobic interactions between molecules - the principle of mutual dislike
C-C and C-H bonds
Attractions between non-polar regions
In order to form a solid from a liquid, the molecules have to slow down and stable interactions must form between them (same goes for a gas to a liquid).
Q. What kinds of intermolecular attractions can form between molecules that have mostly non-polar covalent bonds?
A. VDW attractions (hydrophobic attractions)
A saturated Triglyceride
Saturated Triglycerides can make many VDW contacts
The ability to stack closely means that saturated triglycerides have many intermolecular attractions