Vitamins basics
Everything you need to know about vitamins for health and wellbeing

Science-based expertise supporting
Introducing innovations that meet consumer needs
DSM's Scientific Services provide expert support around life sciences, in particular
DSM's Scientific nutrition sciences, tailored to innovations and target consumers. We elaborate the scientific substantiation to meet the requirements of different stakeholder groups, including
Services academia, the scientific community, regulatory experts, health care professionals and consumers. Our science-led advice enables our customers to create and market nutritional solutions based on health benefit acumen.
This document explores the significance of vitamins in supporting our health and wellbeing and offers an in-depth guide to the functions that all 13 individual vitamins have in the body.
2 3
Why are vitamins
Nutrients
Substances found in food that are critical important?
to human growth and function
Vitamins are essential nutrients that are required by humans in small amounts. This is why they Macronutrients Micronutrients are known as micronutrients. Vitamins are vital for life, aiding normal growth and healthy bodily functions such as cardiovascular, cognitive and eye health.
They are needed for processes that create or use energy, such as the metabolism of proteins and fats, the digestion of food and absorption of nutrients, growth and development, physical performance, and regulation of cell function, with each vitamin having important and specific functions within the body. Aside from vitamin D3, vitamins are not produced by the human body and must therefore be obtained via the diet.
Carbohydrates Fats Proteins Vitamins Minerals
Where do vitamins fit into our diets?
Being complex organisms, humans have a host of nutritional WaterFat-soluble Major Trace needs. In order to maintain healthy lives, it is vital that we soluble vitamins minerals minerals consume the correct nutrients through our diet to maintain vitamins normal body function. The different types of nutrients that we need can be split into two categories: macronutrients
Calcium Iron
(carbohydrates, proteins and fats) and micronutrients
A B Phosphorus Zinc
(vitamins and minerals) (figure 1). While micronutrients, such
Sodium Copper as vitamins, are not required in the same quantities as Potassium Manganese macronutrients, they are equally as important for our bodies, D B1 Chloride Flouride
Magnesium Chromium as both work together to maintain overall health.
Sulfur Molybdenum
Vitamins can be further categorized into fat-soluble and E B2 Selenium
Iodine water-soluble types. Fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamins
A, D, E and K, are stored in the body's fat tissue which acts as B3
K a resource of fat-soluble vitamins if they are not consumed every day. The remaining nine vitamins are water-soluble and B5
must be used by the body immediately once consumed.
The exception is vitamin B12, which can be stored in the liver
B6
for many years.
Failing to achieve sufficient B7
! vitamin intake from our diet can cause insufficiency or B9
even deficiency states,

B12

which may lead to long-term health implications.

Figure 1. Categorization of vitamins
4 5
Early life nutrition
Successfully
Emerging science shows that good nutrition during pregnancy and infancy can 'program' the immediate and long-term health of a growing baby. It is therefore important that women and babies receive the necessary nutrients at appropriate levels during the first 1,000 days - the period between the onset of bridging a woman's pregnancy and her child's second birthday - to provide the foundation for a healthy childhood, adolescence and adulthood.
Food and beverage
People often find it difficult to incorporate nutrient dense food nutritional gaps into their diet i.e. food that provides a high proportion of key nutrients relative to its energy content. In these instances, fortified food and beverages can offer a convenient and costeffective solution to help prevent nutrient shortfalls and associated inadequacies and promote long-term optimal health.
Approximately one-third of the global Vitamins play a role in several market segments, Dietary supplements population has a suboptimal micronutrient including early life nutrition, food and beverage, To achieve adequate and optimal nutrient status in the body and support good health throughout life, there is a need to status as a result of an insufficient intake of dietary supplements, public health, and address the nutritional balance within the diet. Dietary vitamins and minerals, often referred to as medical nutrition, as well as the pharmaceutical supplements can complement normal food and offer consumers a convenient and effective solution to ensure
'hidden hunger'. A deficiency of one or more industry, where vitamins are used as active optimal intake and status of specific vitamins, preventing vitamins may result in a deficiency disease, pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs). nutrient shortfalls and the associated inadequacies or even deficiencies.
such as scurvy, beriberi, rickets, osteomalacia and others, depending on which vitamin is Public health insufficient in the body. Where there is As the world's population increases and 'hidden hunger'
(i.e. malnutrition caused by chronic inadequate intake of inadequate intake of vitamins compared to essential vitamins and minerals, despite sufficient intake of recommendations, individuals can experience calories) affects more people worldwide, optimized nutrition serious, long-term health implications and is becoming ever more critical. As well as fortification of foods, multiple micronutrient supplements, micronutrient increased susceptibility to disease. As chronic powders and lipid-based nutrient supplements have been disease levels rise globally, health and proven to be effective at helping vulnerable population groups achieve optimum nutrition.
wellbeing remain significant concerns for governments and healthcare systems Medical nutrition worldwide. In developed countries, rising Vitamins used in specialized medical nutrition solutions for the management of a health condition or disease are critical to healthcare costs and the burden of caring for recovery, both for patients and for elderly populations that are aging populations provide additional not able to meet adequate nutrient requirements via normal food. Specialized medical nutrition products that address challenges. As such, there is a greater need disease and age-related malnutrition include solutions for for the development of effective, nutritional oral nutritional supplements (ONS), enteral nutrition and solutions that address individual health parenteral nutrition.
concerns and lifestyle needs.
Pharmaceutical applications
Therapeutic uses of vitamins cover a wide range of medical conditions. Emerging research suggests that vitamins, alone or in combination with other drugs, may provide a new and low risk treatment strategy for certain diseases. Because they are essential nutrients, vitamins are inherently biocompatible and typically have an established safety profile.
6 7

Forewards 10
The complete history of vitamins 12
Malnutrition - a global challenge 16
Continued vitamin innovation 18
Guide to all 13 vitamins 20
Vitamin A 21
β-Carotene 26
Vitamin D 32
Vitamin E 38
Vitamin K 44
Vitamin C 50
Vitamin B1 (Thiamine) 56
Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) 62
Vitamin B3 (Niacin) 68
Vitamin B5 (Pantothenic acid) 74
Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxin) 80
Vitamin B7 (Biotin) 86
Vitamin B9 (Folic acid) 92
Vitamin B12 (Cyanocobalamin) 98
Glossary 104
References 107
Index 107
8 9
Foreword
Hidden hunger has become a significant problem in both developing and developed countries
I am a strong believer that the key to improving consumer health and nutrition, and combating hidden hunger, is scientific research and continuous innovation. While we have already achieved a significant amount in the last 100 years
Peter van Dael of vitamin research, malnutrition persists and there are still
Senior Vice President, knowledge gaps among the scientific community. As such, current and future research must focus on addressing
Nutrition Science & Advocacy the biggest issues in nutrition, which include improving and adjusting the recommendations for micronutrient consumption
The global population is growing rapidly year-on-year and worldwide to today's lifestyles.
people are living longer than ever before. While this is an excellent example of how far we have come in terms of As pioneers in vitamin research and experts in nutritional scientific and medical advances, with this aging population science, we play a pivotal role in providing science-based comes an increased responsibility for the food, beverage and information and in educating the population about the dietary supplements industries, as well as governments and importance of sustainable nutrition. Sharing best practices health authorities, to support health and wellbeing throughout and scientific knowledge, as well as having a clear life. Hidden hunger has become a significant problem in both understanding of different cultural dietary preferences, are developing and developed countries, affecting approximately all critical to innovate and are actions that we strongly two billion people worldwide. Although progress has been encourage the entire food industry to take. With new insights made in tackling the problem, hidden hunger still remains an and continued research, we can then find innovative and important challenge to overcome. increasingly personalized ways to keep the growing and aging population healthy.
As a purpose-led, global science-based company in Nutrition,
Health and Sustainable Living, DSM will continue to transform as the world does - just as we have throughout history - using our bright science to keep the growing population healthy. We have the ambition to make the world a better place, and we are thinking about tomorrow, today. Our science is already making a big impact, but only together can we create a healthier, more sustainable future. For more than 11 years, we Current and future research have partnered with the World Food Programme (WFP) to help deliver nutritious food to more than 31 million beneficiaries must focus on addressing the around the world. Additionally, DSM Scientific Services, a biggest issues in nutrition trusted leader in connecting people to science-led knowledge on human nutrition and health, helps to educate people on hidden hunger and chronic malnutrition, as we strive to end hunger in all its forms.
10 11
The complete history of vitamins
The discovery that micronutrients, such as The discovery of vitamins vitamins, are an essential part of the diet was While several physicians, researchers and experts had previously linked healthy eating to healthy bodies, vitamins a major scientific breakthrough in our were not actually discovered until 1912, when Polish scientist, understanding of health and disease. In fact,
Dr. Casimir Funk, isolated thiamine, or vitamin B1, in rice bran.
until the role of vitamins was realized food Funk realized that thiamine could cure patients of beriberi, a disease now known to be caused by deficiency of the nutrient.
was simply viewed as a source of protein and
At the time, he named the special nutritional components of energy, and diseases such as scurvy and food 'vitamines', after 'vita' meaning vitally important, or life, and 'amine', an organic derivative of ammonia, however, they rickets were not linked to malnutrition. Now later came to be known as vitamins.
the focus has shifted completely and it is well
Since the discovery of thiamine, there have been significant known that our health depends on sufficient advances in vitamin research. In 1916, American biochemist intake of essential vitamins and minerals, with Elmer V McCollum introduced the letters A, B, C and D, that we are so familiar with today, to identify each vitamin. Throughout science indicating that adequate levels can the 20th century, most notably in the 1920s, there were many even reduce the risk of developing disease. scientific breakthroughs in the world of vitamins, as researchers continued to isolate and identify various vitamins Vitamin Alternative name Discovery Isolation Structure Synthesis found in food. During this decade, vitamin C was discovered as the antiscorbutic factor in food, vitamin D was identified by
Vitamin A Retinol 1910 1931 1931 1947
irradiating food to treat rickets, vitamin E in vegetable oils, and vitamin K in cholesterol-rich diets. By 1941 all 13 vitamins had β-Carotene Provitamin A 1831 1831 1931 1950
been determined and characterized (figure 2).
Vitamin D Calciferol 1919 1932 1936 1959
Vitamin E Tocopherol 1922 1936 1938 1938
Winning science: 12 Vitamin K Phylloquinone 1929 1939 1939 1939
Nobel prizes have been
Vitamin C Ascorbic acid 1912 1928 1933 1933
awarded over the years for
Vitamin B1 Thiamine 1897 1912 1936 1936
outstanding advances in vitamin science. Vitamin B2 Riboflavin 1920 1933 1935 1935
Vitamin B3 Niacin 1936 1936 1937 1994
Vitamin B5 Pantothenic acid 1931 1938 1940 1940
Vitamin B6 Pyridoxine 1934 1938 1938 1939
Vitamin B7 Biotin 1931 1935 1942 1943
Vitamin B9 Folic acid 1941 1941 1946 1946
Vitamin B12 Cobalamins 1926 1948 1956 1972
Figure 2. The history of vitamins
12 13
Paving the way for major advances in nutrition science
Eventually, this period of discovery would pave the way for routes and formulation technology applications following the major advancements in nutrition science and lead to the new vitamin research that was emerging. In 1934, pharmaceutical development of the nutritionally rich foods and supplements giant, Hoffmann-La Roche, became the first company to that are so commonplace today (figure 3). In order for people produce vitamins on an industrial scale. In the years that to benefit from vitamins without relying on dietary intake followed, all vitamins were to become available via chemical alone, breakthroughs in vitamin production, formulation and synthesis, fermentation or extraction from natural sources, application were required. Pharmaceutical companies, namely offering opportunities to fortify diets or use as supplements.
in Europe and the US, were inspired to develop synthetic
Vitamin Main functions Risks in state of deficiency
Night blindness, xerophthalmia;
A Visual pigments in the retina; cell differentiation keratinization of skin
No known adverse side effects of a low
β-Carotene Antioxidant carotenoid diet, provided vitamin A intake is adequate
Maintenance of calcium balance; enhances
Rickets (poor mineralization of bone);
D intestinal absorption of Ca2+ and mobilizes osteomalacia (demineralization of bone) bone mineral
Extremely rare: serious neurological
E Antioxidant, especially in cell membranes dysfunction
Coenzyme in formation of β-carboxyglutamate
K Impaired blood clotting, hemorrhagic disease in enzymes of blood clotting and bone matrix
Coenzyme in hydroxylation of proline and lysine
Scurvy, impaired wound healing, loss of dental
C in collagen synthesis; antioxidant enhances cement, subcutanecus hemorrhage absorption of iron
Coenzyme in pyruvate and 2-keto-glutarate Peripheral nerve damage (beriberi) or
B1 dehydrogenases and transketolase; poorly defined central nervous system lesions (Wernickefunction in nerve conduction Korsakoff syndrome)
Coenzyme in oxidation and reduction reactions; Lesions of corner of mouth, lips, and tongue:
B2
prosthetic group of flavoproteins seborrheic dermatitis
Coenzyme in oxidation and reduction reactions, Pellagra, photosensitive dermatitis, depressive
B3
functional part of NAD and NADP psychosis
Functional part of coenzyme A and acyl Peripheral nerve damage (burning
B5
carrier protein foot syndrome)
Coenzyme in transamination and decarboxylation of
Disorders of amino acid metabolism,
B6 amino acids and glycogen phosphcrylase; role convulsions in steroidhormone action
Coenzyme in carboxylation reactions in Impaired fat and carbohydrate
B7
gluconeogenesis and fatty acid synthesis metabolism, dermatitis
B9 Coenzyme in transfer of one carbon fragments Megaloblastic anemia, neural tube defects
Pernicious anemia (megaloblastic anemia with
B12 Coenzyme in transfer of one carbon fragments degeneration of the spinal cord)
Figure 3. Biochemical function of vitamins
14 15
However, despite these efforts and recommendations,
Malnutrition - inadequate vitamin intake and status still remains a globally prevalent issue and is considered one of the most significant public health challenges of the 21st century. In fact, the majority of the world's population achieves lower than recommended intake, and status, of one or more essential vitamins. In addition to this, the population is aging rapidly a global challenge around the globe. With insufficient vitamin intake linked to long-term health implications, this is creating significant burdens on societies and healthcare systems. As such, addressing the nutritional gap to improve the lives of millions of people worldwide has become a significant priority for food, beverage and supplement manufacturers, as well as
By the 1940s, leading authorities had already governments, non-governmental organizations, healthcare established dietary standards and nutrient professionals and nutrition experts.
recommendations for the required and safe intake of vitamins, depending on age, gender
The increasing burden of hidden hunger and risk groups. Since then, mandatory
Nutrient-dense foods are those that are high in nutrients, fortification programs have been established such as vitamins and minerals, but relatively low in calories.
in the majority of countries across the Consumption of nutrient-dense foods associated with lower energy intakes results in a higher quality of diet and improved world to ensure sufficient vitamin intake health outcomes. However, a third of the world's population among populations. suffers from 'hidden hunger' i.e. malnutrition caused by chronic inadequate intake of essential vitamins and minerals, despite sufficient intake of calories. Most people affected by
'Probably no other technology available today hidden hunger do not show the physical symptoms usually associated with hunger and malnutrition. As a result, offers as large an opportunity to improve micronutrient insufficiency has largely been ignored until lives and accelerate development at such low recently and is considered a new health challenge. With the cost and in such a short time.' increasing aging population and prevalence of disease, there is a need to raise awareness of, and re-balance, the nutrientWorld Bank energy density within food products and solve the hidden hunger issue. Here, clear nutritional labeling is important, as it gives maximum transparency and allows people to make healthier food choices.
16 17
Dietary reference intakes (DRIs)
DRIs are the recommended levels for specific nutrients and consist of the following types of recommendations:
- Estimated Average Requirement (EAR)
- Recommended Daily Intake (RDI)
- Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL)
Observed level of intake
In the graph above, the RDI is set to meet the nutritional needs of 97-98% of a population and is higher than the EAR. The left curve shows progressive reduction of the risk of inadequacy with increased intake. After that, there is a range where an individual can consume more of a nutrient, before hitting the
UL where adverse effects may appear. So, while the RDI sets the target, the UL sets the limit.
DRIs are not minimum or maximum nutritional requirements, nor are they intended to fit everybody, and should be used only as guides for healthy populations and not for those who are ill or malnourished. DRIs can help healthy people determine whether intake of a particular nutrient is adequate and are used by healthcare professionals and policy makers to determine nutritional recommendations for special groups of people, who may need help reaching nutritional goals.

ycauqedani fo ksiR
Risk for adverse effects
Continued vitamin innovation

EAR RDI UL

1.0 1.0
After more than 100 years since the discovery
AI of vitamins, ongoing scientific research still provides fresh insights into their role in
0.5 0.5
supporting health and wellbeing, as well as getting us closer to determining the appropriate nutritional doses and dietary reference intakes (DRIs). More recently, pharmaceutical doses are also being explored in clinical trials to establish how vitamin APIs can support humans
Figure 4. A theoretical framework of the DRI values beyond day-to-day health and wellbeing.

Guide to all Vitamin A
13 vitamins
Health benefit solutions
DSM's extensive portfolio of Health Benefit
Solutions targets specific areas of health and lifestyle to ensure consumers have access to innovative and appealing nutrition products to suit their needs. Every solution utilizes DSM's strong scientific heritage and diverse portfolio of high-quality ingredients and custom Retinol, axerophthol. Retinol Serving - Vision
(μg) (g) premixes, as well as its broad technical and - Differentiation of cells
Liver, tuna fish 200,000 150
- Fertility regulatory network and expertise in market
Liver, pig 28,000 150
- Embryogenesis, growth positioning and marketing. Chemistry: Cod liver oil 24,000 20 and development
Retinol and its related compounds Eel 1,050 100 - Immunity consist of four isoprenoid units joined Egg yolk 700 19 - Intact epithelia head to tail and contain five conjugated Camembert double bonds. They naturally occur as cheese 380 30
alcohol (retinol), as aldehyde (retinal) or
Salmon 40 150
as acid (retinoic acid).
Chicken 39 150
Cow's milk, whole 31 200
Beef (muscles) 20 150
Pork (muscles) 6 150
Molecular formula of vitamin A (retinol) Veal (muscles) 0.1 150
20 21
Vitamin A Functions Dietary sources
Retinal, the oxidized metabolite of retinol, is essential for The richest food source of preformed vitamin A is liver, with normal vision. Retinoic acid, on the other hand, is considered considerable amounts also found in egg yolk, dairy products to be responsible for almost all non-visual functions relating and fish. Provitamin A carotenoids are predominantly found in
Vitamin A is a generic term for a group of fat-soluble compounds found in to vitamin A. Retinoic acid acts by binding to the retinoic acid carrots, yellow and dark green leafy vegetables (e.g. spinach, receptor (RAR), which is attached to DNA responsible for the broccoli), pumpkin, apricots and melon. Until recently, vitamin animal sources (where it is referred to as 'preformed vitamin A' or 'retinol') expression of more than 500 genes. This influences numerous A activity in foods was expressed as international units (IU).
and in fruits and vegetables (where it is known as 'provitamin A carotenoid'). physiological processes and induces hormone-like activity. This unit is still the measurement generally used on food and supplement labels; however, nutrition scientists now use
Vitamin A has multiple functions in the body but it is considered essential Vision retinol activity equivalent (RAE), which accounts for the rate of
Receptor cells, also known as rod cells, in the retina of the conversion of carotenoids to retinol.
for vision, especially night vision, growth and development, and immune eye contain a light-sensitive pigment called rhodopsin - a complex of the protein opsin and vitamin A metabolite health. Due to its unique role in normal vision, one of the earliest symptoms retinal. The light-induced disintegration of the pigment of its deficiency is night blindness. triggers a cascade of events generating an electrical signal to the optic nerve and promoting vision. Rod cells with this pigment can even detect very small levels of light, making them important for night vision.
Cellular differentiation
The many different types of cells in the body perform highly specialized functions. The process whereby cells and tissues become 'programed' to carry out their special functions is called differentiation. Through the regulation of gene 1 RAE = 1 μg retinol expression, retinoic acid plays a major role in cellular
= 12 μg β-Carotene from food sources differentiation. In fact, vitamin A is necessary for the normal
= 24 μg α-Carotene from food sources differentiation of epithelial cells i.e. the cells of all tissues lining the body, including skin, mucous membranes, blood = 2 4 μg β-Cryptoxanthin or other provitamin A vessel walls and the cornea. If cells are deficient in vitamin A, carotenoids from food they lose their ability to differentiate properly. = 2 μg β-Carotene from oil = 3.33 IU
Growth and development
Retinoic acid plays an important role in reproduction and Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * embryonic development, particularly in the development of the spinal cord and vertebrae, limbs, heart, eyes and ears.
Immune function
Infants >6 months 400 μg (AI)
Vitamin A is also required for normal immune function. It is essential in maintaining the integrity and performance of skin Infants 7 - 12 months 500 μg (AI) and mucosal cells, which act as a mechanical barrier to Children 1 - 3 years 300 μg pathogens and defend the body against infection. Vitamin A
Children 4 - 8 years 400 μg also plays a central role in the development and differentiation
Children 9 - 13 years 600 μg of white blood cells, such as lymphocytes, killer cells and phagocytes, which play a critical role in the defense of the Males >14 years 900 μg body against disease. Females >14 years 700 μg
Pregnancy 14 - 18 years 750 μg
Pregnancy >19 years 770 μg
Breastfeeding 14 - 18 years 1,200 μg
Breastfeeding >19 years 1,300 μg
* Institute of Medicine (2001)
** As RAEs adequate intake (AI)
If not otherwise specified, this table presents RDIs. Allowable levels of nutrients vary depending on national regulations and the final application.
22 23
Wackenroder isolates
Absorption and body stores Deficiency caution is necessary when considering vitamin A therapy for the orange-yellow
1831 colorant from carrots breastfeeding women as it may pose a risk to a co-existing and names it 'carotene'.
The absorption of vitamin A takes place primarily in the small Vitamin A deficiency increases the risk of morbidity and pregnancy. During pregnancy, a daily dose of 4,333 IU should intestine. Provitamin A carotenoids can be cleaved into retinol mortality, especially in infants, children, pregnant women and not be exceeded. Snell successfully in the intestine and other organs via an enzymatic process. breastfeeding mothers. Worldwide, it is estimated that 250
demonstrates that
Preformed vitamin A occurs as retinylesters of fatty acids. They million pre-school children are vitamin A deficient resulting in Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) night blindness and 1876
are hydrolyzed and retinol is absorbed into intestinal mucosal. 250,000 - 500,000 children becoming blind each year. This xerophthalmia can be
After re-esterification, the retinylesters are incorporated into makes vitamin A deficiency one of the most widespread, yet The recommended daily intake of vitamin A varies according cured by giving the chylomicrons, excreted into lymphatic channels, delivered to preventable, causes of blindness in developing countries. to age, sex, risk group and other criteria applied in patient cod liver oil.
Lunin discovers that, the blood and transported to the liver. Vitamin A is stored in The earliest symptom of vitamin A deficiency is impaired dark individual countries.
besides needing the liver as retinylesters, with stores lasting between one to adaptation, also known as night blindness. Severe deficiency 1880 carbohydrates, fats two years for most adults living in developed countries. can cause xerophthalmia, a condition characterized by changes and proteins, in the cells of the cornea that result in corneal ulcers, scarring Because vitamin A (as retinylester) is stored in the liver, large experimental animals
Measurement can only survive if and blindness. The appearance of skin lesions is also an early amounts taken over a period of time can eventually exceed given small quantities
Vitamin A can be measured in the blood and other body indicator of inadequate vitamin A status. Because vitamin A is the liver's storage capacity and produce adverse effects, such Arnaud describes the of milk powder.
tissues by various techniques. For rapid field tests, a method required for the normal functioning of the immune system, as liver damage, bone abnormalities and joint pain, alopecia, o w f c id a e ro sp te r n ea e d s i p n r e p s la e n n t c s e . 1887
has been developed using dried blood spots. Typical serum even children who are only mildly deficient in the micronutrient headaches, vomiting and skin peeling. On the other hand, concentrations are 1.1 - 2.3 μmol/L. According to WHO, plasma have a higher incidence of respiratory disease and diarrhea, hypervitaminosis A can occur acutely following very high doses concentrations of <0,35 μmol/L indicate a vitamin A deficiency. as well as an increased risk of mortality from infection. Some of the micronutrient taken over a period of several days or as Stepp successfully diseases may induce vitamin A deficiency, most notably liver a chronic condition from high doses taken over a long period extracts the vital
Stability and gastrointestinal diseases, which interfere with the of time. Thus, there is concern about the safety of high intakes 1909 liposoluble substance absorption and utilization of vitamin A. of preformed vitamin A (retinol), especially for infants, small from milk.
Vitamin A is sensitive to oxidation by air. Loss of activity is children and women of childbearing age. For example, normal accelerated by heat and exposure to light. Oxidation of fats Groups at risk McCollum differentiates fetal development requires sufficient vitamin A intake, but and oils (e.g. butter, margarine and cooking oils) can therefore between 'fat-soluble A'
- Pregnant and breastfeeding women consumption of excess retinol during pregnancy is known to and 'water-soluble B.' 1915
destroy fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamin A. In these cause malformations in the newborn. In addition, several cases, the presence of antioxidants such as vitamins C and E - Infants, young children and adolescents studies suggest that long-term intakes of pre-formed vitamin contribute to the protection of vitamin A.
- Alcoholics A in excess of 1,500 μg/day are associated with increased risk Thomas Moore of osteoporotic fracture and decreased bone mineral density demonstrates
- Individuals with a chronic illness 1929 that β-Carotene in older men and women. Only excess intakes of preformed is converted into
Physiological interactions - Individuals with protein malnutrition and malabsorption vitamin A, not β-Carotene, were associated with adverse the colorless form
- T he biologically active metabolite, retinoic acid (RA), - Vegetarians and vegans with additional polymorphisms effects on bone health. Current levels of vitamin A in fortified Karrer isolates pure of vitamin A in the has a fundamental role in the regulation of vitamin A in the BCMO1 gene foods are based on RDI levels, ensuring that there is no retinol from the liver intestine. This is realistic possibility of vitamin A overdosage in the general oil of a species of 1931 the proof that plant target genes. RA binds via nuclear hormone receptors Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use population. In the majority of cases, signs and symptoms of mackerel. Karrer and derived carotenoids
(RARs and RXRs) to the promoters of more than Kuhn isolate active serve as precursor for toxicity are reversible upon cessation of vitamin A intake.
500 genes. The products arising from these genes Studies have shown that vitamin A supplementation given to carotenoids. vitamin A.
are necessary for many different pathways children aged 6 months or older reduces all-cause mortality by The Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine Otto Isler was the first
(IOM, 2001) and the E.C. Scientific Committee on Food (2002)
- C hronic liver and kidney diseases can impair storage 23% to 30% in low income countries. The WHO recommends to synthesize vitamin A and transportation of vitamin A that supplements are given when children are vaccinated. The have set the tolerable upper intake level (UL) of vitamin A 1946 (pure all-trans retinol) intake for adults at 3000 μg RE/day with appropriately lower at Hoffmann-La Roche.
currently daily recommended doses of vitamin A are 1,166 IU at
- Protein malnutrition, general malabsorption and levels for children. He then developed age 6 - 11 months and 1,333 IU at age >12 months. Xerophthalmia an efficient and infectious diseases decrease the uptake of vitamin A
(vitamin A deficiency) is treated with high doses of the vitamin Supplements and food fortification economical industrial in the intestine. This lowers the vitamin A status of the Chombon in Strasbourg
(50,000 - 200,000 IU daily according to age). In developing synthesis for vitamin A.
individual due to impaired binding protein synthesis and Evans in San countries, where vitamin A deficiency is one of the most serious Vitamin A is available in soft gelatin capsules, as chewable or Diego, and their 1987
health problems, children under the age of 6 years and pregnant fizzy tablets, or in ampoules (a small sealed glass capsule). teams, simultaneously and breastfeeding women are the most vulnerable groups. It is also included in most multivitamins and supplements as discover the retinoic acid receptors in retinyl acetate, retinyl palmitate and retinal. Margarine and
Since vitamin A can be stored in the liver, it is possible to build cell nuclei.
up a reserve in children by administration of high-potency milk are also commonly fortified with vitamin A. β-Carotene UNICEF, WHO and may also be added to margarine and many other foods, such the governments of doses. In regular periodic distribution programs for the as fruit drinks, salad dressings, cake mixes, ice cream both for 1997 countries including prevention of vitamin A deficiency, infants <6 months of age
Canada, the United its vitamin A activity and as a natural food colorant.
receive a dose of 50,000 IU of vitamin A, children between six States and the United months and one year receive 100,000 IU every 4 - 6 months Kingdom, as well as and children >12 months of age receive 200,000 IU every 4 - 6 national governments in countries where months. A single dose of 200,000 IU given to mothers Nowadays vitamin A is rarely extracted from fish liver oil.
vitamin deficiency is immediately after delivery of their child has also been found The modern method of industrial synthesis of nature-identical widespread, launch to increase the vitamin A content of breast milk. However, vitamin A is a highly complex, multi-step process. a global campaign to distribute high-dose vitamin A capsules to malnourished children.
24 25
β-Carotene β-Carotene
β-carotene is a member of the carotenoid family, which is made up of the red, orange and yellow fat-soluble pigments naturally present in many fruits, grains, oils and vegetables. Of the naturally occurring carotenoids that can be converted to vitamin A in the body, β-carotene is the most abundant and efficient form found in foods. However, as well as being a safe source of vitamin A, β-carotene also functions as an antioxidant and a sun protection agent.
Chemistry: Food: Main functions:
β-Carotene is a red-orange pigment and mg/100g - Source of vitamin A (provitamin A) a member of the carotenes, which are Carrots 7.6 - Antioxidant terpenoids. It is made up of eight
Kale 5.2 - Sun protection (UV-filter) isoprene units, which are cyclized at
Spinach 4.8
each end. The long chain of conjugated double bonds is responsible for the Cantaloupes 4.7
orange color of β-Carotene. Apricots 1.6
Mangoes 1.2
CH 3 Broccoli 0.9
HC
3 CH Pumpkins 0.6

H 3 C Asparagus 0.5
H 3 C CH 3 Peaches 0.1
CH (Souci, Fachmann, Kraut)

CH
3CH

HC
Molecular formula of β-Carotene 3
2266 27
Functions Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use
Bioavailability of β-Carotene
β-Carotene is the most important dietary source of vitamin A 1 RE = 1 μg retinol Immune system and is critical for normal human function. Vitamin A is Bioavailability refers to the proportion of β-Carotene 1 RAE = 12 μg β-Carotene from food sources In a number of animal and human studies, β-Carotene essential for normal growth and development, immune that can be absorbed, transported and utilized by the 1 RAE = 3.33 IU vitamin A activity from retinol supplementation was found to enhance certain immune response and vision. body once it has been consumed. It is influenced by a 1 RAE = 2 μg β-Carotene in oil responses. For example, β-Carotene and other carotenoids,
β-Carotene's antioxidant properties are well documented, number of factors: have been proven to prevent infections. Research shows it can helping to neutralize free radicals - reactive and highly - β -Carotene from dietary supplements is better lead to an increase in the number of white blood cells and the energized molecules, which are formed through normal absorbed than β-Carotene from foods activity of natural killer cells, which are important in biochemical reactions (e.g. the immune response and Stability combating multiple diseases. It may be the case that prostaglandin synthesis), or through exogenous sources such - F ood processing such as chopping, mechanical β-Carotene stimulates the immune system once it has as air pollution or cigarette smoke. Free radicals can damage homogenization and cooking enhances the Carotenoids can lose some of their activity in foods during undergone conversion to vitamin A. The antioxidant actions of lipids in cell membranes, as well as DNA in cells. The resulting bioavailability of β-Carotene storage due to the action of enzymes and exposure to light β-Carotene protect cells of the immune system from damage and oxygen. Dehydration of vegetables and fruits may also damage may lead to the development of cancer in some - T he presence of fat in the intestine affects absorption by reducing the toxic effects of reactive oxygen species.
greatly reduce the biological activity of carotenoids. On the individuals. β-Carotene is also known to provide protection of β-Carotene. The amount of dietary fat required to other hand, carotenoid stability is retained in frozen foods. Skin against skin damage from sunlight. ensure carotenoid absorption is low (approximately 3
 - 5 g per meal) Evidence has shown that β-Carotene may have a role in protecting the skin from sunlight damage. β-Carotene can be
Dietary sources used as an oral sun protectant in combination with sunscreens
Physiological interactions for the prevention of sunburn. Its effectiveness has been
The best sources of β-Carotene are yellow or orange shown both alone and in combination with other carotenoids vegetables, as well as fruits and dark green leafy vegetables: - V itamins C and E stabilize and rescue β-Carotene or antioxidant vitamins.
- Yellow/orange vegetables: Plasma carotenoid concentration, which reflects the intake of - C hronic liver and kidney diseases may impair storage
Carrots, sweet potatoes, pumpkins, winter squash carotenoids, is determined by HPLC (high performance liquid and transport of β-Carotene Erythropoietic protoporphyria chromatography). Traditionally, vitamin A activity of In patients with erythropoietic protoporphyria - a
- Yellow/orange fruits: - A lcohol abuse hampers the capacity of
β-Carotene has been expressed in International Units (IU; 1 IU photosensitivity disorder leading to abnormal skin reactions to
Apricots, cantaloupes, papayas, mangoes, carambolas, β-Carotene storage
= 0.60 μg of β-Carotene). However, this conversion factor does sunlight - β-Carotene in doses of up to 180 mg has been nectarines, peaches not consider the poor bioavailability of carotenoids in humans. - P rotein malnutrition, as well as general shown to have a photoprotective effect.
- Dark green leafy vegetables: Thus, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and Expert malabsorption, can influence and decrease the
Spinach, broccoli, endive, kale, chicory, escarole, watercress Committee propose that vitamin A activity be expressed as transport and uptake of β-Carotene within and beet leaves, turnips, mustard, dandelion retinol activity equivalent (RAE). 12 μg β-Carotene provides the intestine
1 μg retinol. For labeling, official national directives should
- Additional sources: - Reduced blood levels of lutein be followed.
Summer squash, asparagus, peas, sour cherries, prune plums
Deficiency
Bile salts and fats are needed for the absorption of β-Carotene
Although consumption of provitamin A carotenoids can in the upper small intestine. Many dietary factors, e.g. fat and prevent vitamin A deficiency, there are no known adverse protein, therefore affect absorption. For instance, approximately clinical effects of a low carotenoid diet, provided vitamin A
10% to 50% of the total β-Carotene consumed is absorbed in intake is adequate.
the gastrointestinal tract. The proportion of carotenoids absorbed decreases as dietary intake increases. Within the
Groups at risk intestinal wall, also known as the mucosa, β-Carotene is
- Pregnant and breastfeeding women partially converted into vitamin A (retinol) by the enzyme
β-Carotene monooxygenase 1 (BCMO1), with this mechanism - Infants, young children and adolescents being regulated by the individual's vitamin A status. So, if the
- Alcoholics (alcohol hampers the capacity of vitamin A storage) body has enough vitamin A, the conversion of β-Carotene decreases. Therefore, β-Carotene is a very safe source of - Individuals with a chronic illness, i.e. cystic fibrosis patients vitamin A and high intakes will not lead to excess vitamin A in
- Individuals with protein malnutrition and malabsorption the body. Any additional β-Carotene is stored in the fat tissues of the body and the liver. This is why an adult's fat stores are - Vegetarians and vegans with additional polymorphisms in often yellow from accumulated carotene while an infant's fat the BCMO1 gene stores are white.
28 29
Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) Supplements and food fortification History
Until recently, dietary intake of β-Carotene has been expressed β-Carotene is available in hard and soft gelatin capsules, in as part of the RDI for vitamin A. The daily vitamin A multi-vitamin tablets, antioxidant vitamin formulas and as
Wackenroder isolates the Specifications for requirements for adult men and women are 900 μg and 700 μg food color. Margarine and fruit drinks are also often fortified orange-yellow pigment β-Carotene use in foods of preformed vitamin A (retinol) respectively. However, data with β-Carotene. In 1941, the FDA (US Food and Drug in carrots and coins the 1831 1972 is established by the US continues to support a role for β-Carotene as an important Administration) established a standard of identity for the term 'carotene'. Food Chemicals Codex.
micronutrient in its own right. Consumption of foods rich in addition of vitamin A to margarine. Since then, however,
β-Carotene is therefore being recommended by scientific and vitamin A has been partly replaced by β-Carotene, which government organizations. In Europe and the US, recommended additionally imparts an attractive yellowish color to this Arnaud describes the Carotene is established intakes range from 2 mg to 6 mg β-Carotene per day for adults. product. Due to its high safety margin, β-Carotene has been widespread presence of as 'GRAS', which means recognized as more suitable for fortification purposes than 1887 carotenes in plants. that the ingredient is 1979
'Generally Recognized As
Safety vitamin A.
Safe' and can be used as
β-Carotene is a safe source of vitamin A. Due to the regulated a dietary supplement or conversion of β-Carotene into vitamin A, overconsumption Willstatter and Mieg in food fortification.
establish the molecular does not produce hypervitaminosis A. Excessive intakes of
Isler and team developed a method to synthesize β-Carotene formula for carotene, 1907
β-Carotene may cause carotenodermia, which manifests itself and it has been commercially available in crystalline form a molecule consisting of in a yellowish tint of the skin, mainly in the palms of the hands since 1954. 40 carbon and β-Carotene/carotenoids and soles of the feet. The yellow color disappears when 56 hydrogen atoms. 1981 are recognized as carotenoid consumption is reduced or stopped. 1982 important factors
(independent of their
High doses of β-Carotene (up to 180 mg/day), used for the provitamin A activity) in treatment of erythropoietic protoporphyria, have shown no Palmer and Eckles potentially reducing the discover the presence of risk of certain cancers.
adverse effects.
1914 carotene and
The British Expert Committee on Vitamins and Minerals (EVM) xanthophylls in human blood plasma.
recommends a UI for supplementation of 7 mg/day over a
β-Carotene is life-time period. The level of supplemental intake of demonstrated to
β-Carotene for which epidemiological studies did not reveal be an effective 1984
any increased cancer risk or adverse health effects in the Steenbock suggests antioxidant in vitro.
a relationship between general population is 15 mg/day (Latest evaluation by the yellow plant pigments 1919
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) in March 2012).
(β-Carotene) and vitamin A. Due to the large number of epidemiological
1988 studies that demonstrate the potential reduction
Moore demonstrates that of cancer incidence with
β-Carotene is converted increased consumption
1929 into the colorless form of of dietary β-Carotene, vitamin A in the liver. the US National Cancer
Institute (NCI) issues dietary guidelines advising Americans to
Karrer and collaborators include a variety of determine the structures vegetables and fruits in of β-Carotene and 1931 their daily diet.
vitamin A.
Isler and colleagues develop a method for
1950 synthesizing β-Carotene. Results from the French
SU.VI.MAX study indicate that a combination 2004
of antioxidant vitamins
β-Carotene is found (C, E and β-Carotene) acceptable for use in and minerals lowers foods by the Joint FAO/ 1966 total cancer incidence
WHO Expert Committee and all-cause on Food Additives. mortality in men.
30 31
Vitamin D Vitamin D
Vitamin D comprises a group of fat-soluble compounds that are essential for regulating the amount of calcium and phosphate in the body i.e. the nutrients needed to keep bones, teeth and muscles healthy. It is synthesized by the skin when exposed to UV light, such as sunlight. However, it can also be found in some foods including oily fish, red meat, liver and egg yolks, as well as fortified foods and dietary supplements. If vitamin D deficiency occurs, individuals may experience rickets, a frequent childhood disease in many developing countries, or osteoporosis, also known as 'brittle bone' disease.
'Sunshine' vitamin, antirachitic factor, (μg)/100g - R egulation of calcium and cholecalciferol, ergocalciferol. Herring 25 phosphate homeostasis
Salmon 16 - B one mineralization and
Chemistry: teeth formation
Sardines 11
- Cell function, proliferation
Vitamin D refers to a family of Mackerel 4
and differentiation structurally related compounds that Eggs 2.9
- Modulation of the immune system display antirachitic activity. Members of
Butter 1.2
the D-family are derived from the - Neurotransmitter signaling
Milk (whole) 0.07
cyclopentanoperhydro- phenanthrene - Muscle contraction ring structure for steroids.
- Heartbeat regulation
- Reduces blood clotting
Technically, vitamin D is classified as aseco-steroid. Seco-steroids are those in which one of the rings has been broken; in vitamin D, the 9,10 carboncarbon bond is broken.
Molecular formula of vitamin D
32 3333
Functions Dietary sources Groups at risk
Following absorption or endogenous synthesis, the vitamin Vitamin D is found only in a few foods. The richest natural - All ages living in a geographic location higher than must be converted before it can perform its biological sources of vitamin D are fish liver oils and salt-water fish - V itamin D, together with vitamin K, vitamin C, vitamin 40 degrees latitude during wintertime functions. Calciferol is transformed in the liver to 25- such as sardines, herring, salmon and mackerel. Eggs, meat, B6 and calcium are required for bone formation - Individuals with naturally darker skin hydroxycholecalciferol (25(OH)D), also known as calcidiol. milk and butter also contain small amounts, and plants are
- Vegetarians and vegans
This is the major circulating form, which is metabolized in the considered poor sources, with fruit and nuts containing - W omen taking oral contraceptives have been found
- Individuals with little or no sun exposure including:
kidney to the active form as required. The most important no vitamin D at all. The amount of vitamin D in breastmilk to have slightly elevated blood levels of 1,25(OH)D of these is 1,25-dihydroxy-cholecalciferol (1,25(OH)2D), or is often insufficient to cover infant requirements, and needs to - Elderly individuals living in care homes calcitriol, because it is the hormone responsible for most of be supplemented. - T here is evidence to suggest that statins are also - I ndividuals that avoid sun exposure for cosmetic the biological functions in the human body. The formation associated with elevated vitamin D concentrations or health reasons of 1,25(OH)2D is strictly controlled according to the body's
Absorption and body stores - Shift workers and coal miners calcium needs. The main controlling factors are the existing - C holestyramine (a resin used to stop reabsorption of
- I ndividuals with protective dress code levels of 1,25(OH)2D itself and the blood levels of parathyroid Absorption of dietary vitamin D takes place in the upper part bile salts) and laxatives, based on mineral oil, inhibit
(e.g. religious or cultural) hormone, calcium and phosphorus. As such, 1,25(OH)2D plays of the small intestine with the aid of bile salts. It is stored in the absorption of vitamin D from the intestine an important role for the proper functioning of muscles, adipose tissue and must be metabolized to become active and - I ndividuals with diseases or illnesses (e.g. skin cancer
- O rticosteroid hormones, anticonvulsant drugs and nerves and blood clotting and for normal bone formation carry out its biological functions. patients and long term hospitalized patients) alcohol may affect the absorption of calcium by and mineralization. - Certain medical conditions, such as obesity or being reducing the body's response to vitamin D
Measurement underweight, end stage liver disease, renal disease and
To perform its biological functions, 1,25(OH)2D, like other
- A nimal studies also suggest that anticonvulsant nutrient malabsorption syndromes (such as cystic fibrosis, hormones, binds to a specific nuclear receptor (vitamin D Vitamin D status is best determined by the plasma 25(OH) drugs stimulate enzymes in the liver, resulting in an coeliac disease and inflammatory bowel disease), or receptor, VDR). D concentration as this reflects dietary sources, as well as increased breakdown and excretion of the vitamin D medications, affect vitamin D metabolism
Upon interaction with this receptor, 1,25(OH)2D regulates more vitamin D production by UV light in the skin. Usual plasma
- C ertain anti-epileptic drugs may decrease plasma - Infants (if breastmilk contains little vitamin D) than 250 genes in a wide variety of tissues. Vitamin D is also 25(OH)D values are between 25 and 130 nmol/L depending
25(OH)D levels and thus induce vitamin D insufficiency essential for the control of normal calcium and phosphate on geographic location. 1 μg vitamin D is equivalent to 40 IU Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use blood concentrations. It is required for the absorption of (international unit). Concentrations less than 25 nmol/L are calcium and phosphate in the small intestine and can maintain considered to be deficient. In the treatment of rickets, a daily dose of 40 μg (1,600 IU) blood calcium and phosphate concentrations through bone vitamin D usually results in normal plasma concentrations
Stability Deficiency mobilization and increased reabsorption in the kidney. of calcium and phosphorus within 10 days. The dose can be reduced gradually to 10 μg (400 IU) per day after one
It has also been suggested that vitamin D plays an important Vitamin D is relatively stable in foods. Storage, processing and Vitamin D deficiency leads to increased parathyroid hormone month of therapy. Vitamin D analogues (synthetic vitamin D) role in controlling cell proliferation, differentiation, immune cooking have little effect on its activity, although in fortified (PTH) levels, followed by a disturbance of the normal calcium are commonly used in the treatment of inflammatory skin responses and insulin secretion. milk up to 40% of the vitamin D added may be lost as a result and phosphate homeostasis. In children, unspecific symptoms conditions such as psoriasis. Vitamin D is also discussed of exposure to light. such as restlessness, irritability, excessive sweating and as a prevention factor for a number of diseases. Results impaired appetite may appear. Prolonged vitamin D deficiency from epidemiological studies and evidence from animal can induce rickets, a condition that is characterized by models suggest that the risk of several autoimmune diseases developmental delay and skeletal abnormalities as a result
(including multiple sclerosis, insulin-dependent diabetes of decreased calcium and phosphate availability. Rickets also mellitus and rheumatoid arthritis) may be reduced through results in inadequate mineralization of tooth enamel leading adequate vitamin D status.
to tooth decay.
Among the first signs of osteomalacia, a similar condition to It is already well-documented that vitamin D plays a major role rickets in adults, is bone and muscle pain that can progress in the prevention of osteoporosis as vitamin D insufficiency is to muscle weakness and muscular spasms, as well as an an important contributing factor in this disease. A prospective increased risk of infection. Severe vitamin D deficiency will study among 72,000 postmenopausal women over a period result in bone brittleness. Insufficient vitamin D status has of 18 years, indicated that women consuming at least 15 μg/d also been strongly associated with osteoporosis, a condition (600IU vitamin D/day) from food and supplements had a 37% where a loss of bone density results in weaker bones and lower risk of hip fracture. Evidence from clinical trials suggest an increased risk of falling, fractures and muscle weakness. that vitamin D supplementation slows down bone mineral
Besides the skeletal effects, vitamin D deficiency has also density loss and decreases the risk of osteoporotic fracture been linked to a heightened risk of chronic diseases, including in men and women. Various surveys and studies indicate that autoimmune diseases, heart diseases, infectious diseases and poor vitamin D intake or status may be associated with an type 2 diabetes. increased risk of colon, breast and prostate cancer. Recent studies have also shown that vitamin D3 is up to 87% more potent than vitamin D2, which may explain why vitamin D3
exerts stronger effects on the prevention of fractures and falls.
3344 3355
Supplements and food fortification History
Hereditary vitamin D-dependent
Mono-preparations of vitamin D and related compounds are rickets (type I and II): available as tablets, capsules, oily solutions and injections.
Whistler writes the first De Luca's team discover
Vitamin D is also incorporated in combination with vitamin A, scientific description of a second form of vitamin
These rare forms of rickets occur in calcium and in multivitamins. In many countries, milk and milk rickets. 1645 1978 D-resistant rickets (Type II).
products, margarine and vegetable oils fortified with vitamin D spite of an adequate supply of vitamin serve as a major dietary source of the vitamin.
D. They are inherited illnesses in
In his textbook on Abe and colleagues in which the formation or utilization of clinical medicine, Japan demonstrate that
Cholecalciferol is produced commercially by the action of 1865 Trousseau recommends 1981 calcitriol is involved in
1,25(OH)2D is impaired.
ultraviolet light on 7-dehydrocholesterol, which is obtained cod liver oil as the differentiation of from cholesterol by various methods. Ergocalciferol is treatment for rickets. bone-marrow cells.
produced in a similar manner from ergosterol, which is He also recognizes the importance of extracted from yeast. The starting material for the production Provvedini and sunlight and identifies
Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) of calcitriol is the cholesterol derivative pregnenolone. osteomalacia as the th co e l l p e r a e g s u e e n s c e d e o m f c o a n lc s i t t r r a i t o e l 1983
adult form of rickets.
receptors in human
In 1997, the Food and Nutrition Board based AI on the assumption
Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * Mellanby proposes that leukocytes.
that vitamin D is not produced by UV light in the skin. An AI rickets is due to of 5 μg (200 IU)/day was recommended for infants, children the absence of a fat- 1919
and adults (ages 19 - 50 years). Based on the considerable soluble dietary factor. The same group presents
Group Life stage Dose/day** evidence that calcitriol number of scientific studies that have been published since, 1984 has a regulatory role in vitamin D is now recommended at 5 μg to 15 μg (200 - 600 Infants 0 - 12 months 400 IU (10 μg) (AI) immune function.
IU)/day for children through to adulthood. For the elderly, McCollum and team higher intakes of 15 μg to 20 μg (600 - 800IU)/day are also Children 1 - 18 years 600 IU (15 μg) establish the distinction recommended to maintain normal calcium metabolism and Males 19 - 50 years 600 IU (15 μg) 1922 between vitamin A and Baker and team clone the antirachitic factor maximize bone health, which is essential for the control of Females 19 - 50 years 600 IU (15 μg) (the prevention or cure the vitamin D receptor normal calcium and phosphate blood concentrations. It is Males 51 - 70 years 600 IU (15 μg) for rickets). and show that it belongs 1989
to the steroid-hormone required for the absorption of calcium and phosphate in the
Females 51 - 70 years 600 IU (15 μg) McCollum and group receptor gene family.
small intestine and can maintain blood calcium and phosphate name the antirachitic concentrations through bone mobilization and increased Males >70 years 800 IU (20 μg) factor vitamin D. Hess 1925
reabsorption in the kidney. Females >70 years 800 IU (20 μg) and Weinstock show that A prospective study a factor with antirachitic from Feskanich and
It has also been suggested that vitamin D plays an important Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 600 IU (15 μg) activity is produced in 2003 team among 72,000
role in controlling cell proliferation, differentiation, immune Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 600 IU (15 μg the skin by ultraviolet postmenopausal women responses and insulin secretion. irradiation. Windaus identifies the in the US over 18 years structure of vitamin D in indicates that women
1936 cod liver oil. consuming at least 600
* European Food Safety Authority (2010) IU vitamin D/day from
Vitamin D toxicity has only been associated with excessive ** In the absence of adequate exposure to sunlight adequate intake (AI) food plus supplements
If not otherwise specified, this table presents RDIs. Allowable levels of nutrients have a 37% lower risk of supplement intake of daily doses greater than 50,000 IU of hip fracture.
vary depending on national regulations and the final application. Bruck and colleagues vitamin D. Hypervitaminosis D is a potentially serious problem accomplish the though as it can cause permanent kidney damage, growth first pure chemical 1967
retardation, calcification of soft tissues and even death. synthesis of vitamin D, Researchers from the
Mild symptoms of intoxication include nausea, weakness, without photochemical Harvard School of Public constipation and irritability. irradiation steps. 1989 Health examine cancer incidence and vitamin D
Hypervitaminosis D is not associated with overexposure to the Fraser and Kodicek exposure in over 47,000
sun because a regulating mechanism prevents overproduction discover that calcitriol is
1970 produced in the kidney. men in the Health of vitamin D. Professionals Follow-Up
Study. They find that
The upper intake level for vitamin D is set to 1,500 IU/day a high level of vitamin D for infants, 2,500 - 3,000 IU/day for children and 4,000 IU/day
(~1500 IU daily) is for adults. Fraser and colleagues associated with a 17% discover the presence reduction in all cancer of an inborn error 1973 incidences and a 29% of vitamin D metabolism reduction in total cancer that produces mortality with even rickets resistant to stronger effects for vitamin D therapy. digestive- system cancers.
36 37
Vitamin E Vitamin E
Vitamin E is found in a wide variety of foods and helps to maintain healthy skin and eyes, acts as an antioxidant and supports the body's immune defense against illness and infection. No clinical deficiency symptoms of vitamin E have ever been noted in healthy adults. The micronutrient is stored in various tissues, meaning depletion of its stores takes a very long time, although deficiency may occur in individuals with genetic disorders or in premature infants.
α-, β-, γ-, δ-tocopherol and (μg)/100g - M ajor fat-soluble antioxidant
α-, β-, γ-, δ-tocotrienol. Wheat germ oil 174 - N on-antioxidant functions in cell
Sunflower oil 63 signaling, gene expression and
Chemistry: regulation of other cell functions
Hazelnut 26
A group of compounds composed of a Rape seed oil 23
substituted chromanol ring with a C16 Soya bean oil 17
side chain saturated in tocopherols,
Olive oil 12
with 3 double bonds in tocotrienols.
Peanuts 11
Walnuts 6
Butter 2
Spinach 1.4
Tomatoes 0.8
Molecular formula of vitamin E
Apples 0.5
Milk (whole) 0.14
3388 3399
Functions retinopathy. Early diagnostic signs are leakage of muscle
Physiological interactions enzymes, increased plasma levels of lipid peroxidation
Vitamin E functions as a lipid soluble antioxidant, preventing products and increased hemolysis of erythrocytes (red blood the propagation of free-radical reactions. Free radicals are - T he presence of other antioxidants, such as vitamin C cells). In premature infants, vitamin E deficiency is associated formed in normal metabolic processes upon exposure to and β-Carotene, supports the antioxidative and with hemolytic anemia, intraventricular hemorrhage (a exogenous toxic agents, such as cigarette smoke and protective action of vitamin E. The same is true for condition in which blood vessels within the brain burst and pollutants. Vitamin E is located within the cellular membranes the mineral selenium bleed into the ventricles) and retrolental abnormal blood and protects polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and other vessel development in the retina of the eye.
- T he requirement for vitamin E varies as it is related components of cellular membranes from oxidation by free to the amount of PUFAs consumed by an individual;
radicals. Apart from maintaining the integrity of the cell Groups at risk the higher the amount of PUFAs, the more vitamin E membranes in the human body, it also protects low density
- Vitamin E deficiency may occur as a result of genetic is required lipoproteins (LDL) from oxidation. Additionally, nonabnormalities in α-TTP, various fat malabsorption syndromes antioxidant functions of α-tocopherol have recently been - W hen taken at the same time, iron reduces the and protein-energy malnutrition identified, including its ability to inhibit protein kinase C availability of vitamin E to the body, which is activity, which is involved in cell proliferation and especially critical in the case of anemic newborns Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use differentiation. Vitamin E is also known to inhibit platelet aggregation and enhances vasodilation (the widening of blood - Vitamin K deficiency may be exacerbated by vitamin E, Research studies indicate that vitamin E has numerous health vessels). Furthermore, vitamin E enrichment of endothelial which can affect blood coagulation benefits. It is thought to play a role in preventing atherosclerosis cells down regulates the expression of cell adhesion - Various medications decrease absorption of vitamin E, and cardiovascular disease (CVD), i.e. heart disease and stroke, molecules, thereby decreasing the adhesion of blood cell including cholestyramine, colestipol and isoniazid due to its effects on the development of atherosclerosis, such components to the endothelium. as the inhibition of LDL oxidation, smooth muscle cell proliferation, platelet adhesion, aggregation and platelet release
Dietary sources reaction. Studies also suggest that vitamin E enhances immunity in the elderly and that supplementation with vitamin E lowers
Vegetable oils, including olive, soya bean, palm, corn, Deficiency the risk of contracting an upper respiratory tract infection, safflower and sunflower oil, as well as nuts, whole grains and
Because depleting vitamin E from tissue stores takes a long particularly the common cold. Researchers are investigating the wheat germs are the main sources of vitamin E. Seeds, green time, no overt clinical deficiency symptoms have been prophylactic role of vitamin E in protecting against exogenous leafy vegetables, fruits, dairy products, fish and meat also recognized in otherwise healthy adults. However, symptoms of pollutants and lowering the risk of cancer cataracts. In contain vitamin E. Measurement vitamin E deficiency are seen in patients with fat malabsorption combination with vitamin C, it may also protect the body from
At present, the vitamin E content of foods and dietary Normal α-tocopherol concentrations in plasma measured by syndromes or liver diseases. In individuals with genetic oxidative stress caused by extreme sports, such as ultrasupplements is listed on labels in international units (IU). high performance liquid chromatography range from 12 - 45 μM defects, it affects the α-tocopherol transfer protein. It is also marathon running. Vitamin E supplementation is also under
Naturally sourced vitamin E is called RRR-alpha-tocopherol (0.5 - 2 mg/100 ml). Plasma α-tocopherol concentrations of found in new-born infants, particularly premature babies. investigation for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases
(commonly labeled as d-alpha-tocopherol); the synthetically <11.6 μM, the level at which erythrocyte hemolysis occurs, such as Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Vitamin E deficiency results in neurological symptoms produced form is all rac-alpha-tocopherol (commonly labeled indicates a poor vitamin E nutritional status. Since plasma
(neuropathy), myopathy (muscle weakness) and pigmented as dl-alpha-tocopherol). To convert from mg to IU, 1 mg of levels of α-tocopherol correlate with cholesterol levels, the alpha-tocopherol is equivalent to 1.49 IU of the natural form or α-tocopherol concentration is often indicated as α-tocopherol2.22 IU of the synthetic form. When converting from IU to mg, 1 cholesterol ratio. Generally, vitamin E content is expressed by
IU of the natural form is equivalent to 0.67 mg alpha- biological activity, using the scale of IU. According to this tocopherol and 1 IU of the synthetic form is equal to 0.45 mg of system, 1 mg of RRR-α-tocopherol, biologically the most active alpha-tocopherol. of the naturally occurring forms of vitamin E, is equivalent to
1.49 IU vitamin E. The biological activity of 1 mg of all-rac-αtocopheryl acetate, the synthesized form of vitamin E commonly used in food enrichment, is equivalent to 1 IU.
Vitamin E is absorbed together with lipids in the small
Recently, the unit of α-tocopherol equivalent was established intestine, depending on adequate pancreatic function and
(see: Dietary sources).
biliary secretion. It is then incorporated into chylomicrons and transported via the lymphatic system to the liver.
Stability
α-tocopherol is the vitamin E form that predominates in blood
Light, oxygen and heat are detrimental factors encountered and tissue, due to the liver protein α-tocopherol transfer during long storage periods of foodstuffs and food processing protein, which preferentially incorporates α-tocopherol into as they reduce the vitamin E content of food. In some cases, the lipoproteins. It is then delivered to different tissues vitamin E content can decrease by as much as 50 percent after throughout the body. The highest vitamin E contents are found only two weeks of storage at room temperature. Chemical in the adipose tissue, liver and muscles. The pool of vitamin E compounds of α-tocopherol (α-tocopheryl acetate and in the plasma, liver, kidneys and spleen turns over rapidly,
α-tocopheryl succinate) are often used for supplements whereas turnover of the content of adipose tissue is slow.
because they are more resistant to oxidation during storage.
40 41
Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) Safety History
The recommended daily intake of vitamin E varies and Vitamin E has a low toxicity and after reviewing more than 300
depends on age, sex and country of residence. In the US, the scientific studies, the US-based Institute of Medicine (IOM)
Vitamin E is discovered by McKay and King suggest
RDI for adults is 15 mg RRR-α-tocopherol/day (FNB, 2000). In concluded that vitamin E is safe for chronic use even at doses Evans and Scott Bishop. that vitamin E functions
Europe, adult recommendations range from 4 to 15 mg α-TE/ of up to 1,000 mg per day. A recently published meta-analysis 1922 1980 as an antioxidant day for men and from 3 to 12 mg α-TE/day for women. The RDI suggested that taking a high dose of more than 2,000 IU located primarily in the cell membrane.
for vitamin E of 15 mg cannot easily be acquired even with the vitamin E per day leads to an increase in the risk of all-cause best nutritional intentions. mortality. However, much of the research was completed in patients at high risk of a chronic disease, therefore these Evans and team
Vitamin E intake should also be adapted to the PUFA and the findings may not be applicable to healthy adults. isolate α-tocopherol
E.C. Scientific Committee on Foods (SCF) has suggested a 1936 in its pure form from Walton and Packer consumption ratio of 0.4 - 0.6 mg α-TE per gram of PUFA. Moreover, many long-term studies with much higher doses of wheat germ oil. propose that vitamin E vitamin E did not report any adverse effects. In fact, meta- may prevent the 1980
generation of potentially analyses with neutral or beneficial outcomes on all-cause carcinogenic oxidative mortality have outnumbered the negative ones, and there is products of unsaturated no consistent information on how vitamin E might increase risk fatty acids.
of mortality. It is therefore generally accepted that vitamin E
Fernholz provides intakes of up to 1,600 IU (1073 mg RRR-α-tocopherol) are safe the structural formula Vitamin E is for most adults. While in the European Union an upper intake of vitamin E and 1938 demonstrated to be the level of 300 mg alpha-tocopherol equivalents per day has been Nobel laureate Karrer 1980s major lipid-soluble established for adults; in the UK this level has been set at 540 synthesizes antioxidant protecting mg/day for supplemental vitamin E, and in the US at 1,000 mg dl-α-tocopherol. cell membranes from peroxidation. Vitamin E per day for any form of supplemental alpha-tocopherol.
is shown to stabilize the
It is important to note that pharmacologic doses of vitamin E superoxide and hydroxyl free radicals.
may increase the risk of bleeding in patients treated with anticoagulants. Patients on anticoagulant therapy or those Dam and colleagues anticipating surgery should avoid high levels of vitamin E. discover peroxides in the
1945 fat tissue of animals fed
Supplements and food fortification on vitamin E-deficient Effectiveness of vitamin E diets. The first in inhibiting LDL
Vitamin E is available in soft gelatin capsules and as chewable antioxidant theory of (low density lipoprotein) 1990
vitamin E activity or effervescent tablets. It is also found in most multivitamin oxidation is shown.
is proposed.
supplements. The most common use is in fortified foods, such as soft drinks and cereals.
The all-rac-α-tocopherol form of vitamin E is widely used as an
Kaiser and team antioxidant in stabilizing edible oils, fats and fat-containing
Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * elucidate the singlet
Tappel proposes that food products. For example, research has shown that vitamin E 1990 oxygen quenching vitamin E acts as an in combination with vitamin C may reduce the formation of in vivo antioxidant to 1962 capability of vitamin E.
Group Life stage Dose/day** nitrosamines (a proven carcinogen in animals) in pork more protect cell lipids from effectively than vitamin C alone. free radicals.
Infants <6 months 4 mg (AI)
Vitamin E has typically been used as an anti-inflammatory
Azzi and colleagues
Infants 7 - 12 months 5 mg (AI) agent to enhance skin moisturization and to prevent cell describe an inhibitory
Children 1 - 3 years 6 mg damage by UV light. In pharmaceutical products, tocopherol is effect of α-tocopherol 1991
Children 4 - 8 years 7 mg used to stabilize syrups, aromatic components, and vitamin A The Food and Nutrition on the proliferation of or provitamin A components. Board of the US National vascular smooth muscle
Children 9 - 13 years 11 mg 1968 Research Council cells and protein
Males <14 years 15 mg Production recognizes vitamin E kinase C activity.
as an essential nutrient
Females >14 years 15 mg
Vitamin E, derived from natural sources, is obtained by for humans.
Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 15 mg molecular distillation and in most cases subsequent
Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 19 mg methylation and esterification of edible vegetable oil products. Human vitamin E Barella and group
Synthetic vitamin E is produced from fossil plant material by deficiency syndromes demonstrate that condensation of trimethylhydroquinone with isophytol. are described. 1977 2004 vitamin E regulates gene expression in the liver
* Institute of Medicine (2001) and the testes of rats.
* As α-tocopherol adequate intake (AI)
If not otherwise specified, this table presents RDIs. Allowable levels of nutrients vary depending on national regulations and the final application.
42 43
Vitamin K Vitamin K
Fat-soluble vitamin K plays an essential role in blood clotting and is also important for healthy bone growth and development. Vitamin K deficiency is uncommon in healthy adults as it is widespread in foods, including dairy.
However, where vitamin K status is low, studies have shown that it can lead to higher risk of diseases, such as osteoporosis i.e. age-related bone loss.
Phylloquinone (vitamin K1); MK-n, μg/100g - C oenzyme for a vitamin K-dependent
Menaquinone (vitamin K2). Spinach 305 carboxylase
Brussels sprouts 236 - Blood coagulation
Chemistry: Broccoli 155 - Bone metabolism
Compounds with vitamin K activity Rape seed oil 150
are 3-substituted 2-methyl-1,4- Soya bean oil 138
naphthoquinones. Phylloquinone
Lettuce 109
contains a phytyl group, whereas
Cabbage 66
menaquinones contain a polyisoprenyl side chain with 6 to 13 isoprenyl units Asparagus 39
at the 3-position. Olive oil 33
Butter 7
Molecular formula of vitamin K
44 45
Functions Measurement Deficiency Groups at risk
- Individuals with gastrointestinal disorders, fat
Vitamin K is essential for the synthesis of the biologically Plasma vitamin K concentration is measured by high Vitamin K deficiency is uncommon in healthy adults but malabsorption, liver disease and patients of prolonged active forms of vitamin K-dependent proteins. It participates performance liquid chromatography. The normal range of occurs in individuals with gastrointestinal disorders, fat antibiotic therapy coupled with compromised dietary intake in the conversion of glutamate residues of these proteins to plasma vitamin K in adults is 0.2 - 3.2ng/ml. Levels below 0.5 malabsorption, liver disease or after prolonged antibiotic
γ-carboxylglutamate residues by adding a carboxyl-group ng/ml have been associated with impaired blood clotting therapy coupled with compromised dietary intake. Impaired - Patients taking oral anticoagulant drugs, which are
(carboxylation). functions. However, measuring plasma vitamin K blood clotting is the clinical symptom of vitamin K deficiency, vitamin K antagonists concentrations is of limited use as it responds to changes in which is demonstrated by measuring clotting time. In severe
In the absence of vitamin K, carboxylation of these proteins is - Newborn infants can have a risk of vitamin K deficiency, dietary intake within 24 hours. As vitamin K deficiency results cases, bleeding occurs. Adults at risk of vitamin K deficiency incomplete, and they are secreted in plasma in various which may result in fatal intracranial hemorrhage (bleeding in impaired blood clotting, laboratory tests measure clotting also include patients taking anticoagulant drugs, which are so-called under-carboxylated forms, which are biologically within the skull) in the first weeks of life time. Furthermore, the plasma concentration of vitamin-K- vitamin K antagonists.
inactive. Vitamin K is also essential for the functioning of dependent blood-clotting-factors, such as prothrombin, factor - Breast-fed infants have a low vitamin K status because several proteins involved in blood coagulation (clotting), a
VII, factor IX, or factor X, are measured to assess inadequate placental transfer of vitamin K is poor and human milk mechanism that prevents fatal bleeding from cuts and wounds, vitamin K intake or vitamin K status. contains low levels as well as internal bleeding.
Stability
Vitamin K-dependent proteins
Vitamin K compounds are moderately stable to heat and
Prothrombin (factor II), factors VII, IX, and X, and proteins C, S reducing agents but are sensitive to acid, alkali, light and and Z are involved in the regulation of blood coagulation as oxidizing agents.
they are synthesized in the liver. Protein S has also been detected in bone but its role in bone metabolism is not clear.
The vitamin K-dependent proteins osteocalcin and matrix
Gla-protein (MGP) have also been found in bone. Osteocalcin is thought to be related to bone mineralization, while MGP is present in bone, cartilage and vessel walls and has recently - C oumarin anticoagulants such as warfarin, salicylates been established as an inhibitor of calcification. and certain antibiotics act as vitamin K antagonists
Dietary sources - Very high dietary or supplemental intakes of vitamin K may inhibit the anticoagulant effect of vitamin K
A typical western diet provides 90 percent Phylloquinone antagonists, such as warfarin
(vitamin K1) and 10 percent Menaquinone (MK-n, vitamin K2).
- H igh doses of vitamins A and E have been shown
Phylloquinone to interfere with vitamin K and precipitate
Rich food sources are green leafy vegetables, such as spinach, deficiency states broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage and lettuce.
- A bsorption of vitamin K may be decreased by mineral
Menaquinone oil, bile acid sequestrants (cholestyramine, colestipol) and orlistat (weight loss medication)
Bacterial by-product in dairy products. High MK-7 content is found in Natto (fermented soy beans, a traditional Japanese food) (0.8 - 1g/100g).
Vitamin K is absorbed from the jejunum and ileum. As with other fat-soluble vitamins, absorption depends on the presence of bile and pancreatic juices and is enhanced by dietary fat. While the liver is the main storage site, vitamin K is also found in extrahepatic tissues, such as bone and the heart.
Liver stores consist of about 10 percent phylloquinones and 90
percent menaquinones. Compared with that of other fatsoluble vitamins, the total body pool of vitamin K is small and turnover of vitamin K in the liver is rapid. The body recycles vitamin K in a process called the vitamin K cycle, allowing the vitamin to function in the γ-carboxylation of proteins. Although the liver contains menaquinones synthesized by intestinal bacteria, the absorption of menaquinones and their contribution to the human vitamin K requirement have not yet been fully elucidated.
46 47
Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * A series of experiments by Dam results in the
Phylloquinone is the preferred form of the vitamin for clinical The US Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine discovery of vitamin K. 1929
use. It is used for intravenous and intramuscular injections as (2001) has established an AI level for adults, based on a colloidal suspension, emulsion or aqueous suspension, and reported dietary intakes of vitamin K in apparently healthy as a tablet for oral use. population groups. Other health authorities have come to Infants <6 months 2 μg similar conclusions.
Vitamin K1 is used in the treatment of hypoprothrombinemia Infants 7 - 12 months 2.5 μg Dam proposes that the anti-hemorrhagic
(low amounts of prothrombin), secondary to factors limiting European health authorities set the AI levels for phylloquinone Children 1 - 3 years 30 μg 1935 vitamin in chicks is a absorption or synthesis of vitamin K. Vitamin K1 is also at 70micrograms (mcg)/day for all adults. In Germany, Austria
Children 4 - 8 years 55 μg new fat-soluble vitamin, administered during operations in which bleeding is expected and Switzerland, an intake of 70mcg vitamin K per day for men which he calls vitamin K.
Children 9 - 13 years 60 μg to be a problem, such as in gall-bladder surgery. and 60mcg per day for women has been recommended. In the
United States, an AI level for adults of 120micrograms (mcg) Children 14 - 18 years 75 μg
Anticoagulants prevent vitamin K recycling; however, this can vitamin K per day for men and 90mcg/day for women has Males >19 years 120 μg be corrected rapidly and effectively by the administration of Dam and team been established.
vitamin K1. Furthermore, it is often given to mothers before Females >19 years 90 μg succeed in preparing delivery and to newborn infants to protect against intracranial Safety Pregnancy a 75 μg a crude plasma 1936
prothrombin fraction hemorrhage. A putative role of vitamin K in osteoporosis has
Pregnancy >19 years 90 μg and demonstrate that also been investigated since vitamin K-dependent proteins Even when large amounts of vitamin K1 and K2 are ingested
Breastfeeding <18 years 75 μg its activity is decreased have been discovered in bones. over an extended period, toxic manifestations have not when it is obtained from been observed. Breastfeeding >19 years 90 μg vitamin K-deficient
Although, further investigations are required to resolve whether chick plasma.
vitamin K is a significant etiological component of osteoporosis. Therefore, the major health authorities have not established a tolerable UL for vitamin K. However, some allergic reactions
The role of vitamin K in the development of atherosclerosis is Vitamin K1 is have been reported. Administered menadione (K3) has been * Institute of Medicine (2001) synthesized by Doisy.
also under discussion but studies supporting this hypothesis ** Adequate intake (AI) 1939
known to cause hemolytic anemia, jaundice and kernicterus are limited and future research is recommended. Allowable levels of nutrients vary depending on national regulations and the
(a grave form of jaundice in the newborn) and is no longer final application.
Recently, studies with cancer cell lines and animal studies used for treatment of vitamin K deficiency.
have indicated that a combination of vitamin C and vitamin K3
may have antitumor activity and inhibit the development Supplements and food fortification Brikhous observes of metastases. hemorrhagic
Vitamin K supplements are available in tablets and capsules conditions resulting 1940
as well as multivitamin preparations. Infant formula products, from malabsorption syndromes or beverages and cookies are commonly fortified with vitamin K.
starvation, and finds
Menadione salts are generally preferred for farm animals that hemorrhagic because of their stability. disease of newborns respond to vitamin K.
Dam receives half of the
The procedure involves the use of monoester, menadiol and Nobel prize for his
1943 discovery of vitamin K, an acid catalyst. Purification of the desired product, to remove the blood coagulation unreacted reagents and side products, occurs either at the factor. Doisy receives quinol stage or after oxidation. the other half for his discovery of the chemical nature of vitamin K.
The vitamin
K-dependent step in
1974 prothrombin synthesis is demonstrated by
Stenflo and colleagues and Nelsestuen and colleagues.
Esmon discovers a vitamin K-dependent protein carboxylation in 1975
the liver.
48 49
Vitamin C Vitamin C
Also known as ascorbic acid, vitamin C is a water-soluble vitamin that has several important functions including the protection of cells, maintaining healthy skin, blood vessels, bones and cartilage and wound healing, as well as supporting immunity. While most animals are able to synthesize vitamin C in the body, humans do not have the ability to make their own and must obtain it via the diet alone. Oranges and orange juice, as well as other fruits and vegetables, are considered a good source of vitamin C.
L-(+)- Ascorbic Acid, E300 ascorbic acid, mg/100g - Antioxidant
E301 sodium ascorbate, C6H8O6, E302 Rose hip 2000 - Immune stimulation calcium ascorbate, E303 potassium
Acerolas 1600 - Anti-allergic ascorbate, E304 fatty acid esters of
Blackcurrants 200 - C ollagen synthesis 'cement' for ascorbic acid ((i) ascorbyl palmitate,
(ii) ascorbyl stearate). Peppers 138 connective tissues
Broccoli 115 - Wound healing
Chemistry: Fennel 95 - Teeth and gum health
Kiwis 71 - Regeneration of vitamin E
L-ascorbic acid (2,3-endiol-L-gulonic acid-γ-lactone), dehydro-L-ascorbic acid Strawberries 64 - Aids iron absorption
(3-oxo-L-gulonic acid-γ-lactone). Oranges 49 - Eye health
Molecular formula of vitamin C
5500 5511
Functions Absorption and body stores Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use
The most prominent role of vitamin C is its immune Intestinal absorption of vitamin C depends on the amount of Studies suggest that vitamin C plays a role in reducing the risk stimulating effect, which is important for the defense against dietary intake as it decreases with higher intake levels. For of health implications, with a selection presented below:
- T he presence of other antioxidants, such as vitamin E infections such as the common cold. It also acts as an inhibitor example, when consuming 30 to 180 mg, about 70 to 90 % is and β-Carotene, supports the protective antioxidant of histamine, a compound that is released during allergic absorbed. In a single dose of 1 to 1.5g, this amounts to 50 % CVD (heart disease and stroke) action of vitamin C. Other vitamins, such as B-complex reactions. As a powerful antioxidant it can neutralize harmful and in a single dose of 12 g to 16 %. Up to 500 mg can be vitamins (particularly B6, B12, folic acid and The data for vitamin C's protective benefits against CVD are free radicals and aids in neutralizing pollutants and toxins. absorbed via a sodium-dependent active transport process, pantothenic acid) and some pharmacologically active inconsistent. While some studies have failed to find significant
This prevents the formation of potentially carcinogenic while at higher doses, simple diffusion occurs. substances, as well as the naturally occurring reductions in the risk of coronary heart disease (CHD), nitrosamines in the stomach, which mostly stem from the The storage capacity of water-soluble vitamins is generally low compounds known as bioflavonoids, may have a numerous prospective cohort studies have found inverse consumption of nitrite-containing foods, such as smoked compared to that of fat-soluble ones. Humans have an average sparing effect on vitamin C i.e. vitamin C is freed up to associations between dietary vitamin C intake or vitamin C meat. The reduction of oxidative stress has an impact on tissue store of 20 mg vitamin C per/kg body weight. The fulfill other biological functions in the body. plasma levels and CVD risk. Vitamin C may protect coronary cardiovascular disease (CVD), as individuals experiencing arteries by reducing the build-up of plaque, as this helps to highest concentration is found in the pituitary gland (400 mg/ oxidative stress have ascorbic acid blood levels lower than - D ue to toxic compounds in smoke, the vitamin C prevent the oxidation of LDL cholesterol (the 'bad' cholesterol), kg). Other tissues of high concentration are the adrenal glands, healthy individuals. Furthermore, vitamin C is also able to requirement for smokers and passive smokers is especially in combination with vitamin E. Some data has also eye lenses, brain, liver and white blood cells (especially regenerate other antioxidants such as vitamin E. about 35 mg/day higher than for non-smokers. Several shown that vitamin C may boost blood levels of HDL cholesterol lymphocytes and leukocytes).
pharmacologically active compounds, including
(the 'good' cholesterol), which can prevent heart disease. The
As an enzyme co-factor, vitamin C is required for the synthesis antidepressants, diuretics, birth control pills and
Measurement risk of a stroke may be reduced by an AI of vitamin C through of collagen, the intercellular 'cement' substance that gives aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid), deplete the tissues of fruits, vegetables and supplements. However, due to the structure to muscles, vascular tissues, bones, tendons and
Vitamin C can be measured in the blood plasma and other vitamin C. This is also true for other habits, such as inconsistency of the data and its lack of specificity to vitamin ligaments. Due to these functions, vitamin C, especially in body tissues by various techniques. Dipstick tests to estimate alcohol consumption and (passive) smoking.
C, the interpretation of these results is difficult.
combination with zinc, is important for the healing of wounds.
vitamin C levels in the urine are also available. Less satisfying
It also contributes to the health of teeth and gums, preventing is the evaluation of analytical data concerning the true hemorrhaging and bleeding. Additionally, it improves the reflection of the body status. Threshold values are difficult to absorption of iron and is needed for the metabolism of bile define and the subject of controversial discussion. Typical Deficiency acids, which may have implications for blood cholesterol levels blood plasma levels are in the range of 20 to 100 μmol/L.
and gallstones. Vitamin C plays an important role in the
Early symptoms of vitamin C deficiency are not very specific synthesis of several peptide hormones, neurotransmitters and Stability and could also indicate other diseases. Common symptoms carnitines as well. Finally, vitamin C is a crucial factor in the include fatigue, lassitude, loss of appetite, drowsiness, eye's ability to deal with oxidative stress and can delay the Vitamin C is sensitive to heat, light and oxygen which means insomnia, feeling rundown, irritability, low resistance to progression of advanced age-related macular degeneration that long storage or overcooking of food can partly or infections and petechiae (minor capillary bleeding).
(AMD) and vision-loss in combination with other antioxidant completely deplete vitamin C levels. Refrigeration can also vitamins and zinc. substantially diminish vitamin C levels in food. Severe vitamin C deficiency leads to scurvy, characterized by weakening of collagenous structures which results in
Dietary sources widespread capillary bleeding. Infantile scurvy also causes
Influence of storage and preparation on vitamin C loss bone malformations. Usually, bleeding gums and loosening of
Vitamin C is widely found in fruits and vegetables. Citrus fruits, in foods the teeth are the earliest signs of clinical deficiency.
peppers, green vegetables such as broccoli and Brussels
Furthermore, hemorrhages under the skin can form and cause sprouts, and fruits like strawberries, blackcurrants, guava, extreme tenderness of extremities and pain during movement.
mango and kiwi are particularly rich sources. For example,
Food Storage/ Vitamin C If left untreated, these symptoms can result in gangrene and in Cancer depending on the season, one glass of fresh orange juice preparation loss extreme cases, loss of life, although this rarely occurs in The role of vitamin C and cancer has been studied extensively.
(100 g) yields between 15 mg and 35 mg of vitamin C. Potatoes, developed countries today. In 2013, European Food Safety A number of studies have associated higher intakes of vitamin cabbage, spinach and tomatoes are also important sources to
Potatoes 1 month 50% Authority (EFSA) stated that the average requirement to keep C with a decreased likeliness of cancers of the upper digestive help meet essential vitamin C requirements.
Fruits 1 month 20% bodily vitamin C at healthy levels is an intake of 90 mg/day for tract, cervix, ovary, bladder, and colon. Studies have also found men and 80 mg/day for women. a potential cancer-risk reduction after vitamin C
Apples 6 - 9 months 100% supplementation has been used in cases of severe colds. This
Milk UHT 25% Groups at risk may be due to the antihistaminic action of very large doses of
Fruits Sterilization 50% - Smokers and passive smokers are at a higher risk due to vitamin C.
Fruits Air drying 50 - 70% increased oxidative stress and metabolic turnover of vitamin C
Canning 48% Wound healing
- People suffering from illness (i.e. cancer, stroke or tinnitus),
During a postoperative period or during the healing process of infectious and inflammatory diseases, allergies, superficial wounds, supplemental vitamin C contributes to the arteriosclerosis, high blood pressure risk reduction of infections and promotes skin repair.
Modified from Oberbeil, Fit durch Vitamine, Die neuen Wunderwaffen, Südwest
- Mentally and physically stressed people
Verlag GmbH & Co. KG, München 1993
Blood pressure
- Pregnant and breast-feeding women
Several studies have shown associated lower blood pressure levels with vitamin C supplementation at about 500 mg per day due to improved dilation of blood vessels.
52 53
Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * disease, rather than the prevention of chronic disease and the History promotion of optimum health. For smokers, these RDIs are increased by an additional 35 mg/day as smokers are under
Group Life stage Dose/day** increased oxidative stress from the toxins in cigarette smoke Hippocrates describes Pauling draws worldwide and generally have lower blood levels of vitamin C. Higher the symptoms of scurvy. attention with his
Infants 0 - 6 months 40 mg (AI) amounts of vitamin C are also recommended for pregnant 400 BC 1970 controversial bestseller
'Vitamin C and the
Infants 7 - 12 months 50 mg (AI) (80-85 mg/day) and breastfeeding women (115-120 mg/day).
Common Cold'.
Children 1 - 3 years 15 mg British naval physician
James Lind prescribes
Children 4 - 8 years 25 mg oranges and lemons as 1747 Experimental studies in
Children 9 - 13 years 45 mg Current recommendations state that doses above 2 g per day a cure for scurvy. vitro illustrate the antioxidant and singlet- 1975-9
should be avoided to prevent side effects, including bloating
Males 14 - 18 years 75 mg Scurvy is experimentally oxygen quenching and osmotic diarrhea. While the EFSA has decided that there is
Females 14 - 18 years 65 mg produced in guinea pigs properties of vitamin C.
insufficient data to establish a tolerable upper intake level for 1907 by Hoist and Frohlich.
Males >19 years 90 mg vitamin C, one has been set by the U.S. Food and Nutrition
Packer and team observe
Females >19 years 75 mg Board in order to prevent most adults from experiencing the free radical diarrhea and disturbances in the digestive tract. Although a A bioassay is developed 1979 interaction of vitamin E
Smokers, male >19 years 125 mg by Chick and Hume number of possible problems with very large doses of vitamin and vitamin C.
Smokers, female >19 years 110 mg to determine the 1917
C have been suggested, none of these adverse health effects anti-scorbutic properties
Pregnancy <18 years 80 mg have been confirmed, and there is no reliable scientific of foods. Niki demonstrates the
Pregnancy >19 years 85 mg evidence that large amounts of vitamin C (up to 10 g/day in regeneration of vitamin E adults) are toxic. by vitamin C 1982
Breastfeeding <18 years 115 mg Szent-Györgyi in model reactions.
Breastfeeding >19 years 120 mg demonstrates that the
Supplements, food fortification and 1930 hexuronic acid he first
The National Cancer isolated from the adrenal other applications Institute (US) recognizes glands of pigs in 1928 1988 the inverse relationship is identical to vitamin C.
* I nstitute of Medicine (2001) Vitamin C is offered in conventional, effervescent, chewable between vitamin C
** Adequate intake (AI) and time-release tablets, syrups, powders, granules, capsules, intake and various forms of cancer, and issues
If not otherwise specified, this table presents Recommended Dietary Allowances drops and ampoules, either alone or in multivitamin-mineral In independent efforts, guidelines for
(RDIs). Allowable levels of nutrients vary depending on national regulations and preparations. Buffered vitamin C forms i.e. highly absorbable Haworth and King the final application. vitamin C combined with minerals, are less acidic and allow establish the chemical 1932 vitamin C intake.
structure of vitamin C.
higher doses to be administered without stomach upset.
Three studies show that
Vitamin C can also be used in the form of injections and supplementation with
Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) various fruit juices, fruit-flavor drinks and breakfast cereals are The relationship between vitamin C can dramatically 1998/9
enriched with vitamin C as well. On average, vitamin C vitamin C and the lower lead levels.
The recommended daily intake of vitamin C varies according to 1932 anti-scorbutic factor supplements provide up to 8.3 % of the total vitamin C intake age, sex, risk group and criteria applied in individual countries. is discovered by
In 2000, the US Food and Nutrition Board revised the RDI in Europe. Szent-Györgyi and at the A systematic review of thirty studies, values for vitamin C upward to 90 mg/day for men and 75 mg/ Uses in food technology same time by King 2003 addressing the effect of and Waugh.
day for women, based primarily on the prevention of deficiency supplemented vitamin C
The food industry uses ascorbic acid as a natural antioxidant. on the duration of colds,
This means that ascorbic acid, added to foodstuffs during In Basel, Reichstein reveals that there is a processing or prior to packing, preserves color, aroma and synthesizes ascorbic consistent benefit, which acid identical to natural 1933 is an 8% to 14% nutrient content. For example, in meat processing, ascorbic vitamin C. This is the reduction in duration.
acid makes it possible to reduce both the amount of added first step towards the nitrite and the residual nitrite content in the product. The vitamin's industrial Levine calls for a addition of ascorbic acid to fresh flour improves its baking production in 1936. re-evaluation of vitamin qualities, thus saving the four to eight weeks of maturation C, intravenous vitamin C 2004
flour would normally have to undergo after milling. in particular, as part of
Haworth and cancer therapy.
Szent-Györgyi receive
Production 1937 a Nobel prize for their research on vitamin C. A 5-year-long Japanese
The synthesis of ascorbic acid was achieved by Reichstein in study shows that the risk
1933 and industrial production began five years later by 2006 of contracting three
Hoffman La Roche Ltd. The vitamin division, now called DSM In a self-experiment, or more colds during this
Crandon proves the period was decreased by
Nutritional Products Ltd, produces synthetic vitamin C, mandatory contribution 1940 66% with daily intake identical to that occurring in nature, from glucose on an of vitamin C in of a 500 mg vitamin C industrial scale by chemical and biotechnological synthesis. wound healing. supplement.
54 55
Vitamin B1 Vitamin B1
(Thiamine)
Vitamin B1, or thiamine, is one of the eight known water-soluble B vitamins.
(Thiamine)
It helps to break down and release energy from food, maintain a healthy nervous system and also synthesize DNA. Deficiency of the vitamin is rare, as it can be found in most foods in small amounts, however, marginal deficiencies can lead to beriberi. In some cases, individuals take thiamine to maintain a positive mental attitude, enhance learning, increase energy and prevent memory loss.
Antineuritic factor, nerve vitamin. mg/100g - C o-enzyme in energy metabolism
Brewer's yeast 12 - C o-enzyme for pentose metabolism
Chemistry: Wheat germ 2 as a basis for nucleic acids
Sunflower seeds 1.5 - N erve impulse conduction and
Pyrimidine and thiazole moiety linked muscle action by a methylene bridge - phosphorylated Brazil nuts 1
forms: thiamine monophosphate (TMP), Pork Beans 0.9
thiamine diphosphate (TDP), thiamine
Oatmeal 0.8
triphosphate (TTP).
Beef 0.59
Molecular formula of thiamine
5566 555777
Functions Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). The HPLC assay as AIDS or stomach cancer. If treatment of amnesic symptoms is more robust and easier to perform. Thiamine status is delayed, the memory may be permanently impaired. Recent
The main functions of thiamine are connected to its role as a determined through this method is also considered to be in 'A certain, very troublesome affliction, evidence suggests that oxidative stress plays an important role coenzyme in the form of thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP). good correlation with results from transketolase activation which attacks men, is called by the in the neurologic pathology of thiamine deficiency as well.
Coenzymes are 'helper molecules' which activate enzymes, the assays. Usually, whole blood concentrations are found to be inhabitants Beriberi (which means sheep).
proteins that control the thousands of biochemical processes between 66.5 and 200 nmol/L. Groups at risk
I believe those, whom this same disease occurring in the human body. TPP acts as a 'helper molecule'
- Individuals on diuretic medication (water tablets) or digoxin in about 25 enzymatic reactions and is essential in the Stability attacks, with their knees shaking and
(a drug used in heart failure) production of energy from food. Furthermore, TPP is a legs raised up, walk like sheep. It is a coenzyme for the metabolism of branched-chain keto acids Thiamine is unstable when exposed to heat, alkali, oxygen and - Patients recovering from heart failure kind of paralysis, or rather Tremor: for it radiation. Water solubility also affects the loss of thiamine that are derived from branched-chain amino acids.
- Those suffering from or recovering from infections from foods. In fact, about 25 % of the thiamine in food is lost penetrates the motion and sensation
Another important function of thiamine is its activation of an during the normal cooking process. Considerable amounts of the hands and feet indeed sometimes - Individuals with stomach disease and those with cancer, enzyme called 'transketolase', which in turn, catalyzes may also be lost in thaw drip from frozen meats. To preserve liver or thyroid disease the whole body...' reactions in the pentose phosphate pathway. This pathway is thiamine, foods should be cooked in a covered pan for the the baseline for the production of many prominent shortest time possible and should not be soaked in water. Jacobus Bonitus, Java, 1630 - Chronic alcoholics compounds, such as ATP, GTP, NADPH and the nucleic acids Additionally, juices and cooking water should be re-used in
DNA and RNA. Certain non-coenzyme functions of thiamine are stews and sauces.
important for nerve tissues and muscles; thiamin pyrophosphate plays a role in the conduction of nerve
Deficiency impulses in the metabolism of neurotransmitters.
Vitamin B1 deficiency affects the cardiovascular, nervous,
Dietary sources Physiological interactions muscular, and gastrointestinal systems and may manifest itself
Low levels of thiamine are found in most foods with the best - M agnesium: necessary for the conversion of thiamine in the form of fatigue, insomnia, irritability and lack of source being dried brewer's yeast. Other good sources include to its active form concentration, anorexia, abdominal discomfort, constipation and loss of appetite. Without enough thiamine, the overall meat, especially pork and ham products, some species of fish,
- V itamins E and C prevent its oxidation to an decrease in the carbohydrate metabolism and its such as eel and tuna, whole grain cereals and bread, nuts, inactive form interconnection with the amino acid metabolism has severe pulses, dried legumes and potatoes. As the thiamine-rich bran
- T he catalytic mechanism of pyruvate dehydrogenase consequences. The two principal thiamine deficiency diseases is removed during the milling of wheat and during the and other enzymes requires the interplay of several are 'beriberi' and 'Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome'.
polishing of brown rice, many grain products, including flour vitamin-derived cofactors and white rice, are enriched and fortified with thiamine. Beriberi manifests itself primarily in disorders of the nervous
- S moking, sulfonamide and estrogen may and cardiovascular systems. While it is still common in parts of raise requirements south-east Asia, where polished rice is a staple food but
Gastrointestinal absorption of nutritional thiamine occurs in - A lcohol reduces thiamine absorption and blocks thiamine enrichment programs are not fully in place, many the lumen of the small intestine (mainly the jejunum) through phosphorylation of thiamine to its cofactor form (TDP) other countries fortify rice and other cereal grains to replace a sodium and energy dependent active transport mechanism. the nutrients lost in processing.
- D rugs that cause nausea and lack of appetite, or
For thiamine levels higher than 2 μmol/L, passive diffusion which increase intestinal function or urinary Beriberi exists in three forms:
plays an additional role. Thiamine occurs in the human body as free thiamine and its phosphorylated forms. excretion, decrease the availability of thiamine - Dry beriberi - a polyneuropathy with severe muscle wasting
Thiamine has a high turnover rate (10 - 20 days) and is not - D igoxin, indomethacin, anticonvulsants, antacids and - Wet beriberi - which in addition to neurologic symptoms, is appreciably stored in the body (approximately 1 mg/day is some diuretics may lead to the risk of deficiency characterized by cardiovascular manifestations, edema and used up in tissues) so a daily supply is required. The limited - C offee and tea may act as antagonists ultimately heart failure stores may also be depleted within two weeks or less on a
- T hiamine is degraded by thiaminases (present in raw - Infantile beriberi - occurs in breast-fed infants whose thiamine-free diet, with clinical signs of deficiency beginning fish and shellfish) nursing mothers are deficient in thiamine. Symptoms, shortly after. Regular intake of thiamine is therefore critical.
including vomiting, convulsions, abdominal distention and
The heart, kidney, liver and brain have the highest anorexia, usually appear quite suddenly and may be fatal in concentrations, followed by the leukocytes and red blood the event of heart failure cells. Excess thiamine and its acid metabolites are excreted principally in the urine. The 'Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome' (cerebral beriberi) is the thiamine deficiency disease seen most often in the Western
Measurement world. It is frequently associated with chronic alcoholism and in conjunction with limited food consumption. Symptoms
The standard way to assess thiamine status used to be to include confusion, paralysis of eye motor nerves, abnormal determine erythrocyte transketolase (α-ETK) activity, both with oscillation of the eyes, psychosis, confabulation, and impaired and without stimulation of this enzyme by the addition of TDP retentive memory and cognitive function. The syndrome is also cofactor. Technical difficulties led to an increased use of direct seen occasionally in people who fast, have chronic vomiting determination of TDP in whole blood, for example by High
(hook worm) or have gross malnutrition due to diseases such
58 59
neuritis accompanied by excessive alcohol consumption or Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * Takaki, surgeon general,
The development of thiamine pregnancy. With alcoholic and diabetic polyneuropathies, the dramatically decreases the incidence of 1882
therapeutic dose is most often in the range of 10 - 100 mg/ deficiency can be caused by: beriberi in the Japanese daily. When alcoholism has led to delirium tremens, large Group Life stage Dose/day** navy by improving
- Alcoholic disease doses of thiamine, together with other vitamins should be sailors' diets.
given by slow injection. Large doses of thiamine (100 - 600 mg Infants <6 months 0.2 mg (AI)
- Inadequate storage and preparation of food daily) have been advocated in the treatment of such diverse Infants 7 - 12 months 0.3 mg (AI) Dutch medical officers
Eijkman and Grijns
- I ncreased demand due to pregnancy and conditions as lumbago, sciatica, trigeminal neuritis, facial Children 1 - 3 years 0.5 mg 1897 show that the breastfeeding, heavy physical exertion, fever and paralysis and optic neuritis. However, the response to such symptoms of beriberi
Children 4 - 8 years 0.6 mg stress, or adolescent growth treatment has been variable. can be reproduced in
Children 9 - 13 years 0.9 mg chickens fed on polished
- Inadequate nutrition Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) rice, and that these
 - high carbohydrate intake (e.g. milled or polished rice) Females 14 - 18 years 1.0 mg Funk isolates the symptoms can be
Because thiamine facilitates energy utilization, estimated Males >14 years 1.2 mg antiberiberi factor from prevented or cured by
 - r egular heavy consumption of tea and coffee rice bran extracts and 1912 feeding them rice bran.
(Tannin = anti-thiamine) requirements are calculated on the basis of energy intake, Adults >19 years 1.1 - 1.2 mg calls it a 'vitamine' -
 - foods such as raw fish or betel nuts (thiaminases) which can be very much dependent on activity levels. For Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 1.4 mg an amine essential for adults, the RDI is 0.5 mg per 1,000 kcal, which amounts to a life. The name finds
- C ertain diseases (dysentery, diarrhea, cancer, range of 1.0 - 1.1 mg per day for women and 1.2 mg for men, Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 1.4 mg ready acceptance and nausea/vomiting, liver diseases, infections, malaria, based on an average caloric intake. An additional 0.5 mg per helps to focus attention McCollum and Davis on the new concept of propose water-soluble
AIDS, hyperthyroidism) day are recommended during pregnancy and breastfeeding. deficiency diseases. 1915 thiamine as the
- C ertain drugs (birth-control pills, neuroleptica, some * I nstitute of Medicine (2001) antiberiberi factor.
cancer drugs)
If not otherwise specified, this table presents RDIs. Allowable levels of nutrients
Thiamine has been found to be well tolerated in healthy
- Long-term parenteral nutrition (e.g. highly concentrated vary depending on national regulations and the final application.
Jansen and Donath people, even at very high oral doses (up to 200 mg/day).
dextrose infusions) isolate the antiberiberi
Due to its very broad safety margin for oral administration factor from rice bran. 1926
and long history of safe use, none of the official regulatory Supplements and food fortification authorities have defined a safe upper limit for this vitamin.
The only reaction found in humans is of the hypersensitivity Thiamine is mostly formulated in combination with other
Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use type. In the vast majority of cases, however, these reactions B-vitamins (B-complex) or included in multivitamin
The British Medical
Thiamine is specific in the prevention and treatment of have occurred after injection of thiamine in patients with a supplements. Fortification of white flour, cereals, pasta, Research Council beriberi and other manifestations of thiamine deficiency (e.g. history of allergic responses. For parenteral administration, beverages and rice began in the United States during the 1927 proposes thiamine as
Wernicke-Korsakoff, peripheral neuritis). The dosage range is the doses that produced these reactions varied from 5 mg to second World War (1939 - 1945), with other countries quickly anti-beriberi factor.
from 100 mg daily in mild deficiency states to 200 - 300 mg in 100 mg, though most of them occurred at the higher end of following suit. Fortification of staple foods has virtually severe cases. Thiamine administration is often beneficial in this range. eradicated the B-vitamin deficiency diseases in developed nations. Williams, who first began experimenting
Production with thiamine 1936
and beriberi in
Chemical synthesis of thiamine is a complicated process, Manila around involving some 15 - 17 different steps. Although commercial production of thiamine was first accomplished in 1937,
The first commercial the production did not develop on a broad scale until the production of thiamine
1950s, when demand rose sharply as a result of food 1937 is accomplished.
fortification programs.
Williams and team, and Foltz and colleagues carry out 1943
dietary studies that document widespread thiamine deficiency in the United States.
Standards of identity for enriched flour are
1943 created by the US
Food and Nutrition
Board, requiring that thiamine, niacin, riboflavin and iron be added to white flour.
60 61
Vitamin B2 Vitamin B2
(Riboflavin)
Vitamin B2, also known as riboflavin, is one of the most widely distributed
(Riboflavin) water-soluble vitamins. A sufficient intake of riboflavin is important, as it helps the body to convert food components into energy, neutralize free radicals that can damage cells and DNA, and also convert vitamin B6 and B9
into their active forms. Ultra violet (UV) light can destroy riboflavin, so milk, eggs, rice and fortified cereals, which are good sources of the vitamin, should be stored out of direct sunlight.
Riboflavine, lactoflavin, ovoflavin. mg/100g - Reduction-oxidation reactions
Brewer's yeast 3.7 - Energy production
Chemistry: Pork liver 3.2 - Antioxidant functions
Chicken breast 0.9 - C onversion of pyridoxine (vitamin
7,8-dimethyl-10-(1-D-ribityl)-isoalloxazin
 - different redox states: flavochinon Wheat germ 0.7 B6) and folic acid into their active coenzyme forms
(Flox), flavosemichinon (Fl-H), Camembert/Parmesan 0.6
flavohydrochinon (FlredH2). Coenzyme - Growth and reproduction
Form(s): FMN (flavin mononucleotide, - Growth of skin, hair, and nails riboflavin mono-phosphate), FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide, riboflavin adenosine diphosphate).
Molecular formula of riboflavin
6622 666333
Functions is proportional to intake and increases when riboflavin is Stability Deficiency ingested along with other foods. Approximately 15% is absorbed
Flavin coenzymes are essential for energy production via the if taken alone versus 60% absorption when taken with food. Riboflavin, in its aqueous form, is degradable by light and up Overt clinical symptoms of riboflavin deficiency are rarely seen respiratory chain, as they act as catalysts in the transfer of Passive diffusion plays only a minor role in the physiological to 50 % may be lost if foods are left out in sunlight or any UV in developed countries.
electrons in numerous reduction-oxidation reactions (redox doses ingested in the diet. In the mucosal cells of the intestine, light. Because of this light sensitivity, riboflavin will rapidly
However, the sub-clinical stage of deficiency, characterized by reactions). Flavin coenzymes participate in many metabolic riboflavin is again converted to the coenzyme form (FMN). In disappear from milk kept in glass bottles exposed to the sun a change in biochemical indices, is more common. Riboflavin reactions of carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Riboflavin the portal system, it is bound to plasma albumin or to other or bright daylight (85% within 2 hours). Riboflavin is stable deficiency rarely occurs in isolation, and is usually in coenzymes are also essential for the conversion of pyridoxine proteins, mainly immunoglobulins, and transported to the when heated and so is not easily destroyed in the ordinary combination with deficiencies of other B-complex vitamins,
(vitamin B6) and folic acid into their coenzyme forms and for liver, where it is converted to the other coenzyme form, FAD, processes of cooking, but it will leach into cooking water.
because flavoproteins are also involved in the metabolism of the transformation of tryptophan to niacin. and bound to specific proteins as flavoproteins. The pasteurization process causes milk to lose about 20% of other B-complex vitamins. The absorption of iron, zinc and its riboflavin content. Alkalis such as baking soda also destroy
Riboflavin also promotes normal growth and assists in the Riboflavin, mainly as FAD, is distributed in all tissues, but calcium is impaired by riboflavin deficiency.
riboflavin. Sterilization of foods by irradiation or treatment synthesis of steroids, red blood cells, and glycogen. Furthermore, concentrations are low and very little is stored. The liver and with ethylene oxide may also cause destruction of riboflavin. Clinically, riboflavin-deficiency affects many organs and it helps to maintain the integrity of mucous membranes, skin, retinal tissues are the main storage places, albeit riboflavin is tissues. The most prominent effects are on the skin, mucosa eyes and the nervous system, and is involved in the production not stored to any significant extent in the body.
and eyes:
of adrenalin by the adrenal glands. Riboflavin is also important
Riboflavin is excreted mainly in the urine where it contributes for the antioxidant status within cell systems, both by itself - G lossitis (magenta tongue, geographical tongue) and as part of the glutathione reductase and xanthine oxidase to the yellow color. Small amounts are also excreted in sweat Physiological interactions
- C heilosis, angular stomatitis (fissures at the corners of and bile. During breastfeeding, about 10% of absorbed system. This defense system may also help defend against riboflavin passes into the milk. - T hyroxine and triodothyroxine stimulate the FMN the mouth) bacterial infections and tumor.
and FAD in mammalian systems
- S ore throat
- A nticholinergic drugs increase the absorption
- B urning of the lips, mouth, and tongue
Body status can be determined by direct and indirect methods. of riboflavin by allowing it to stay longer at
Most plant- and animal-derived foods contain at least small
Direct methods include the determination of FAD and FMN in absorption sites - I nflamed mucous membranes quantities of riboflavin. However, there are very few natural sources rich in the vitamin. whole blood by HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography). Impact on metabolism, absorption, utilization and - P ruritus (itching)
Usually, whole blood concentrations (FAD) of 175 - 475 nmol/L
The most important and common dietary sources are milk and are measured. Another possibility for riboflavin status storage of riboflavin e.g. by: - S eborrheic dermatitis (moist scaly skin inflammation) milk products, lean meat, eggs and green leafy vegetables. assessment is the monitoring of urinary excretion. Values <27 - O uabain (treatment of congestive heart failure) - C orneal vascularization associated with sensitivity to bright
Cereal grains, although poor sources of riboflavin, are important μg/g creatinine point to deficiency, 27 - 79 μg/g creatinine are - T heophylline (muscle relaxant, diuretic, central light, impaired vision, itching and a feeling of grittiness in for those who rely on cereals as their main dietary component. considered marginal, and values >80 μg/g creatinine are nervous stimulant) the eyes
Fortified cereals and bakery products supply large amounts. considered normal. Urinary excretion rises sharply after tissue saturation is reached. Indirect methods include determining - P enicillin (displaces riboflavin from its binding In severe long-term deficiency, damage to nerve tissue can
Animal sources of riboflavin are more readily absorbed than the activity of the FAD-dependent enzyme erythrocyte protein, thus inhibiting transport to the central cause depression and hysteria. Other symptoms are normocytic vegetable sources. In milk from cows, sheep and goats, at least glutathione reductase (EGR). This biochemical method gives nervous system) and normochromic anemia, and peripheral neuropathy of the
90% of the riboflavin is in the free form; in most other sources, extremities (tingling, coldness and pain). Low intracellular a valid indication of riboflavin status.
it occurs bound to proteins. - C hlorpromazin (anti-psychotic drug), barbiturates levels of flavin coenzymes could affect mitochondrial function,
During riboflavin deficiency, EGR is no longer saturated with and possibly tricyclic antidepressants prevent the oxidative stress and blood vessel dilation, which have been
FAD, so enzyme activity increases when FAD is added in vitro. incorporation of riboflavin into FAD associated with pre-eclampsia during pregnancy.
Most dietary riboflavin is bound to a food protein such as FMN The difference in activity in erythrocytes with and without - R iboflavin impairs the antibiotic activity of and FAD. These are released in the stomach by acidification and added FAD is called the activity coefficient (EGRAC). An EGRAC streptomycin, erythromycin, tyrothricin, carbomycin Groups at risk absorbed in the upper part of the small intestine by an active, >1.30 is indicative of biochemical riboflavin deficiency. and tetracyclines - I ndividuals with inadequate food intake e.g. the elderly, rapid, saturable transport mechanism. The rate of absorption chronic dieters or people with elimination diets
- C affeine, zinc, copper and iron may chelate with riboflavin and affect its absorption - P regnant and breastfeeding women (additional demands)
- I nfants and school children
- A dolescents, particularly girls
- C hronic alcoholics
- I ndividuals with chronic disorders (e.g. tuberculosis, diabetes) and intestinal malabsorption (e.g. morbus Crohn's Disease, lactose intolerance) and trauma, including burns and surgery
- M edication users (oral-contraceptives, antibiotics, tranquillizers)
- A thletes
- N ewborns after phototherapy for newborn hyperbilirubinemia
64 65
Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) Production Blyth isolates lactochrome -
Eye-related diseases Dietary recommendations for riboflavin exist in many countries, Riboflavin can be produced by chemical synthesis or by a water-soluble, yellow 1879
fluorescent material -
Oxidative damage of lens proteins by light may lead to the where mean values for adult males vary between 1.3 and 1.6 mg fermentation processes. Chemical processes are usually from whey.
development of age-related cataracts. Riboflavin deficiency daily. The recommendations of the Food and Nutrition Board refinements of the procedures developed by Kuhn and by leads to decreased glutathione reductase activity, which can of the US National Research Council are based on feeding Karrer in 1934 using xylene, D-ribose and alloxan as starting result in cataracts. Therefore, riboflavin is used in combination studies conducted in the 1940s, which showed that riboflavin materials. Various bacteria and fungi are commercially Warburg and Christian with other antioxidants, like vitamin C and carotenoids, in the intake of 0.55 mg or less per day results in clinical signs of employed to synthesize riboflavin, using cheap natural extract a yellow enzyme prevention of age-related cataracts. Riboflavin has been used deficiency after about 90 days. These data have led to the materials and industrial wastes as a growth medium. 1932 from brewer's yeast to treat corneal ulcers, photophobia and noninfective assumption that an intake of 0.6 mg per 1,000 kcal should supply and suggest that it plays an important part conjunctivitis in patients without any typical signs of deficiency. the needs of healthy people. Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * in cell respiration.
Most cases of riboflavin deficiency respond to daily oral doses of 5 - 10 mg.
Kuhn and team
Riboflavin is non-toxic. No cases of toxicity from ingestion of
Migraines obtain a crystalline riboflavin have been reported. A harmless yellow coloration of Infants <6 months 0.3 mg (AI) yellow pigment with 1933
People suffering from migraine headaches have a modified urine occurs at high doses. The limited capacity of the Infants 7 - 12 months 0.4 mg (AI) growth-promoting mitochondrial oxygen metabolism. Because riboflavin plays gastrointestinal tract to absorb this vitamin makes any properties from egg an important role in energy production, supplemental significant risk unlikely, and because riboflavin is water-soluble, Children 1 - 3 years 0.5 mg white and whey, riboflavin has been investigated to alleviate migraines. When excess amounts are simply excreted. Children 4 - 8 years 0.8 mg which they identify as vitamin B2.
migraine sufferers took 400 mg /day of riboflavin for 3 months, Children 9 - 13 years 0.9 mg they reported significant reductions in both migraine severity
Males >14 years 1.3 mg and frequency. Riboflavin is available as oral preparations, alone, in Females 14 - 18 years 1.0 mg Kuhn and his team in
Heidelberg, and Karrer multivitamin and vitamin B-complex preparations, and as an
Prevention of deficiencies in high-risk patients Females >19 years 1.1 mg 1934 and colleagues in injectable solution. Crystalline riboflavin (E101) is poorly
Zurich, synthesize
Patients suffering from achlorhydria, vomiting, diarrhea, hepatic soluble in water, so riboflavin-5'- phosphate (E 106), a more Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 1.4 - 5 mg pure riboflavin.
disease, or other disorders preventing absorption or utilization, expensive but more soluble form of riboflavin, has been Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 1.7 mg should be treated parenterally. Deficiency symptoms begin to developed for use in liquid formulations. Riboflavin is often improve in 1 - 3 days, but complete resolution may take weeks. added to flour, bakery products and beverages to compensate The Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry of the for losses due to processing. It is also used to fortify milk,
Elevated blood pressure * I nstitute of Medicine (2001) American Medical 1937
breakfast cereals and dietetic products. Due to its bright
** Adequate intake (AI) Association names the
A placebo controlled double-blind randomized controlled trial yellow color, riboflavin is sometimes added to other drugs or If not otherwise specified, this table presents RDIs. Allowable levels of nutrients vitamin 'riboflavin'.
in cardiovascular disease (CVD) patients recently reported that infusion solutions as a marker. vary depending on national regulations and the final application.
riboflavin intervention at the dietary level of 1.6 mg/d resulted in a reduction of systolic blood pressure by 13 mmHg and Theorell determines diastolic blood pressure by almost 8 mmHg, specifically in the structure of flavin
1937 mononucleotide, FMN.
those individuals with the MTHFR 677 TT genotype. The global distribution of individuals with two copies of MTHFR 677T is thought to range from close to 0% in Sub-Saharan Africa to Warburg and Christian
32% in Mexico. isolate and characterize flavin adenine 1938
dinucleotide (FAD) and demonstrate its involvement as a coenzyme.
Sebrell and colleagues demonstrate clinical
1941 signs of riboflavin deficiency in human feeding experiments.
Glatzle and colleagues propose the use of the erythrocyte 1968
glutathione reductase test as a measurement of riboflavin status.
66 67
Vitamin B3 Vitamin B3
(Niacin)
Within the human body, vitamin B3 helps to release energy from the foods
(Niacin) we eat, produce fatty acids and cholesterol, repair DNA and contribute to the stress response. Commonly known as niacin or nicotinic acid, sufficient levels of the water-soluble vitamin are typically met by eating a varied and balanced diet.
Pellagra-Preventive factor (PP), nicotinic mg/100g - C oenzymes - Nicotinamide adenine acid, nicotinamide. Veal og dinucleotide (NAD) and Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
Liver 15
(NADP) - in redox reactions
Chemistry:
Chicken 11
- N AD is a substrate for non-redox
Nicotinic acid (pyridine-3-carboxylic Beef 7.5 reactions acid), nicotinamide (pyridine-3 Salmon 7.5
carboxamide).
Almonds 4.2
Peas 2.4
Potatoes 1.2
Peaches 0.9
Tomatoes 0.5
Molecular formula of nicotinic acid
Milk (whole) 0.1
6688 666999
Functions Measurement Deficiency Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use
The coenzymes NAD and NADP are required for around 200 Determination of the urinary excretion of two niacin metabolites, Symptoms of a marginal niacin deficiency include: insomnia, Niacin is specific in the treatment of glossitis, dermatitis and biological reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions. NAD is mainly N-methyl-nicotinamide and N-methyl-2-pyridone-5- loss of appetite, weight and strength loss, soreness of the the mental symptoms seen in pellagra. High doses of nicotinic involved in reactions that generate energy in tissues through carboxamide, has been used to assess niacin status. Excretion tongue and mouth, indigestion, abdominal pain, burning acid (1.5 - 4 g/day) can reduce total and low-density the biochemical degradation of carbohydrates, fats and of 5.8 ± 3.6 mg N-methyl-nicotinamide/24hrs and 20.0 ± 12.9 sensations in various parts of the body, vertigo, headaches, lipoprotein cholesterol and triacylglycerols and increase proteins. NAD is also required as a substrate for non-redox mg N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide/24hrs are considered numbness, nervousness, poor concentration, apprehension, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in patients at risk of reactions. It is the source of adenosine diphosphate (ADP)- normal. A ratio of the two metabolites is also used for status confusion and forgetfulness. cardiovascular disease (CVD).
ribose, which is transferred to proteins by different enzymes. assessment. An adequate niacin status is considered when the
Severe niacin deficiency leads to pellagra, a disease characterized There is a flush reaction to high doses of nicotinic acid, which
These enzymes and their products seem to be involved in DNA ratio of N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide to N-methylby dermatitis, diarrhea and dementia. A pigmented rash is seen primarily with a rising blood level and may wear off replication, DNA repair, cell differentiation and cellular signal nicotinamide is between 1.3 and 4.0. Recent studies suggest develops symmetrically on the skin in areas exposed to once a plateau level has been reached. Nicotinic acid has also transduction. NADP is important for the reductive biosynthesis that the measurement of NAD and NADP concentrations and sunlight. Symptoms affecting the digestive system include been used in doses of 100 mg as a vasodilator. Type 1 diabetes of fatty acids and cholesterol. their ratio in red blood cells may be sensitive and reliable a bright red tongue, stomatitis, vomiting, and diarrhea. mellitus results from the autoimmune destruction of indicators for the determination of niacin status. A ratio of
Dietary sources Headaches, fatigue, depression, apathy and loss of memory insulin-secreting β-cells in the pancreas. There is evidence erythrocyte NAD to NADP <1.0 may identify subjects at risk of are neurological symptoms of pellagra. If left untreated, that nicotinamide may delay or prevent the development of developing niacin deficiency. Plasma tryptophan concentration
Nicotinamide and nicotinic acid occur widely in nature. pellagra is fatal. Since the synthesis of NAD from tryptophan diabetes. Clinical trials are in progress to investigate this effect is also used for assessment of niacin status.
Nicotinic acid is more prevalent in plants, whereas in animals, requires an adequate supply of riboflavin and vitamin B6, of nicotinamide.
nicotinamide predominates. Most of the niacin obtained from Stability insufficiencies of these vitamins may also contribute to
Recent studies suggest that human immunodeficiency virus food comes from yeast, liver, poultry, lean meats, nuts and niacin deficiency.
(HIV) increases the risk of niacin deficiency. Higher intakes of legumes. Milk and green leafy vegetables contribute lesser Both nicotinamide and nicotinic acid are stable when exposed
Pellagra is rarely seen in industrialized countries, except for its niacin were associated with decreased progression rate to amounts. Specific food processing techniques, such as the to heat, light, air and alkali. Little loss occurs during the cooking occurrence in people with chronic alcoholism. In other parts of AIDS in an observational study of HIV-positive men.
treatment of corn with lime water involved in the traditional and storage of foods.
the world where maize and jowar (barley) are the major preparation of tortillas, increase the bioavailability of nicotinic NAD is consumed as a substrate in ADP-ribose transfer staples, pellagra persists. It also occurs in India and parts of acid in these products. Tryptophan contributes as much as two reactions to proteins which play a role in DNA repair. This has
China and Africa.
thirds of the niacin activity required by adults in typical diets. created interest in the relationship between niacin and cancer.
Important food sources of tryptophan are meat, milk and eggs. Physiological interactions Patients with Hartnup disease, a genetic disorder, develop A large case-control study found increased consumption pellagra because their absorption of tryptophan is defective. of niacin, along with antioxidant nutrients, to be associated
- C opper deficiency can inhibit the conversion of with decreased incidence of cancers of the mouth, throat
Carcinoid syndrome may also result in pellagra as NAD tryptophan to niacin. The drug penicillamine has and esophagus.
Both the acid and amide forms of niacin are readily absorbed synthesis is restricted.
been demonstrated to inhibit the tryptophan-tofrom the stomach and the small intestine. At low concentrations, niacin pathway in humans. The pathway from the two forms are absorbed by a sodium-dependent facilitated Groups at risk tryptophan to niacin is sensitive to a variety of diffusion and, at higher concentrations by passive diffusion. - Patients with Hartnup disease nutritional alterations; inadequate iron, riboflavin,
Niacin is present in the diet mainly as NAD and NADP, and or vitamin B6 status reduces the synthesis. - Patients with carcinoid syndrome nicotinamide is released from the coenzyme forms by enzymes in the intestine. The main storage organ, the liver, may contain - L ong-term treatment of tuberculosis with isoniazid - Alcoholics a significant amount of the vitamin, which is stored as NAD. may cause niacin deficiency, because isoniazid is a
- Those with long-term intake of certain drugs
The niacin coenzymes NAD and NADP are synthesized in all niacin antagonist. Other drugs that interact with tissues from nicotinic acid or nicotinamide. niacin metabolism may also lead to niacin deficiency, e.g. tranquillizers (diazepam) and anticonvulsants
(phenytoin, phenobarbital).
70 71
Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) Safety History
The actual daily requirement of niacin depends on the quantity There is no evidence that niacin from foods causes adverse of tryptophan in the diet and the efficiency of the tryptophan effects. Pharmacological doses of nicotinic acid exceeding 300
The disease pellagra is Spies cures to niacin conversion. The conversion factor is 60 mg of mg per day have been associated with a variety of side effects first described by human pellagra using tryptophan to 1 mg of niacin, which is referred to as 1 niacin including nausea, diarrhea and transient flushing of the skin. 1755 Thiery who calls the 1937 nicotinamide.
equivalent (NE). This conversion factor is used for calculating Doses exceeding 2.5 g per day have been associated with disease 'mal de la rosa'.
both dietary contributions from tryptophan and recommended hepatotoxicity, glucose intolerance, hyperglycemia, elevated allowances of niacin. In the US, the RDI for adults is 16 mg NEs blood uric acid levels, heartburn, nausea and headaches.
for men and 14 mg NEs for women. RDI is estimated as 6.6 mg Severe jaundice may occur, even with doses as low as 750 mg
Krehl discovers that
NE per 1,000 kcal. per day, and may eventually lead to irreversible liver damage. the essential amino
Huber provides acid tryptophan is 1945
Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * Doses of 1.5 to 5 g/day of nicotinic acid have been associated the first description transformed into niacin with blurred vision and other eye problems. Tablets with a of nicotinic acid. 1867 by mammalian tissues.
buffer and time release capsules are available to reduce flushing and gastrointestinal irritation in individuals that are sensitive to nicotinic acid.
Infants <6 months 2 mg (AI) These should be used with caution, however, because a high The concept of niacin
Weidel describes the equivalents is proposed
Infants 7 - 12 months 4 mg (AI) intake of time-release niacin tablets has been linked to liver elemental analysis and 1955 by Horwitt.
Children 1 - 3 years 6 mg damage. The Food and Nutrition Board (1998) set the UL for 1873 crystalline structure of niacin (nicotinic acid plus nicotinamide) at 35 mg/day. The EU the salts and other
Children 4 - 8 years 8 mg
Scientific Committee on Food (2002) developed different ULs derivatives of nicotinic
Children 9 - 13 years 12 mg acid in some detail.
for nicotinic acid and nicotinamide: the upper level (UL) for
Males >14 years 16 mg nicotinic acid has been set at 10 mg/day, for nicotinamide Altschul and colleagues report that high doses
Females >14 years 14 mg at 900 mg/day. of nicotinic acid reduce 1955
Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 18 mg serum cholesterol in humans.
Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 17 mg First preparation of
Single supplements of nicotinic acid are available in tablets, nicotinamide by Engler.

capsules and syrups. Multivitamin and B-complex vitamin infusions, tablets and capsules also contain nicotinamide.
* Institute of Medicine (2001). Niacin is used to fortify grain, including corn and bran Turner and Hughes
** A s NE. 1 mg niacin = 60 mg of tryptophan; demonstrate that the breakfast cereals and wheat flour.
0 - 6 months = preformed niacin (not NE). 1961 main absorbed form of
Funk isolates nicotinic niacin is the amide.
Production acid from yeast.
If not otherwise specified, this table presents RDIs. Allowable levels of nutrients 1913
vary depending on national regulations and the final application
Although other routes are known, most nicotinic acid is produced by oxidation of 5-ethyl-2-methylpyridine.
Nicotinamide is produced via 3-methylpyridine. This Shepperd and colleagues compound is derived from two carbon sources, acetaldehyde Goldberger demonstrates report that high doses of and formaldehyde, or from acrolein plus ammonia. that pellagra is a dietary nicotinic acid lower 1978
deficiency disease. 1915 both serum cholesterol
3-methylpyridine is first oxidized to 3-cyanopyridine which, in and triglycerides.
a second stage, converts to nicotinamide by hydrolysis.
Goldberger and Wheeler Bredehorst and use the experimental colleagues show that
1928 model of black tongue 1980 niacin status affects disease in dogs for the the extent of ADPhuman disease pellagra. ribosylation of proteins.
Elvehjem and team show the effectiveness of nicotinic acid and 1937
nicotinamide in curing canine black tongue.
72 73
Vitamin B5 Vitamin B5
(Pantothenic acid)
Referred to as pantothenic acid, vitamin B5 can be found throughout all
(Pantothenic acid) living cells and in most food sources in small amounts. The water-soluble vitamin helps to produce energy by breaking down the fats and carbohydrates in food, however, it is also known to support the synthesis of fatty acids, cell membranes, neurotransmitters and hemoglobin and promote healthy skin, hair, eyes and liver. Insufficiency of the vitamin is extremely rare, however if it does occur, typical symptoms include tiredness, nausea and vomiting, numbness or 'burning feet'.
Pantothenate, pantothenol, mg/100g - M etabolism of carbohydrates,
D-panthenol, anti-dermatosis vitamin, Veal liver 7.9 proteins and fats chick anti-pellagra factor. Brewer's yeast 7.2 - E nergy supply from nutrients - reduced tiredness and fatigue
Peanuts 2.1
Chemistry: - B iosynthesis of essential lipids, steroids, hormones, neurotransmitters
Pantothenic acid is composed of and porphyrin
β-alanine and 2,4-dihydroxy-3,3-
- Normal mental performance dimethyIbutyric acid (pantoic acid). Acid amide-linked pantetheine consists of - F ormation of red blood cells, as well pantothenic acid linked to a as sex and stress-related hormones
β-mercaptoethylamine group.
Molecular formula of pantothenic acid
7744 777555
Absorption and body stores Deficiency
Most of the pantothenic acid in food exists in the form of CoA Since pantothenic acid occurs to some extent in all foods, it is or ACP, which are converted into pantetheine by a series of - V arious studies have indicated that vitamin B12 may generally assumed that dietary deficiency of this vitamin is enzyme reactions in the small intestine. Pantetheine can be aid in the conversion of free pantothenic acid into extremely rare. However, pantothenic acid deficiency in directly absorbed or is further metabolized to pantothenic CoA. In the absence of vitamin B12, CoA production is humans is not well documented and probably does not occur acid. The absorption happens by passive diffusion and by a decreased and fat metabolism impaired. In animal in isolation, but in conjunction with deficiencies of other B saturable sodium-dependent active transport system, which is experiments, ascorbic acid (vitamin C) was shown to vitamins. Deficiency symptoms have been produced also the case for biotin. Pantothenic acid is transported to the lessen the severity of symptoms due to pantothenic experimentally by administering the antagonist omega-methyl tissues via the circulation of the blood, where it is primarily acid deficiency; vitamin A, vitamin B6, folic acid and pantothenic acid in addition to a pantothenic acid-deficient incorporated into erythrocytes or bound to plasma proteins. biotin are also necessary for proper utilization of diet. They include fatigue, headaches, insomnia, nausea,
It is then embedded into CoA and ACP once again. The cellular pantothenic acid. Together with coenzyme-Q10 and abdominal cramps, vomiting and flatulence. The subjects also pantothenic acid uptake is similar to the intestinal absorption. L-carnitine, pantothenic acid enables the β-oxidation complained of tingling sensations in the arms and legs, muscle of fatty acids in the mitochondria. cramps and impaired coordination. There was cardiovascular
Intracellular concentrations are regulated by the pantothenic instability and impaired responses to insulin, histamine and acid kinase. If nutritional supplement formulations such as - E thanol causes a decrease in the amount of
ACTH (a stress hormone). Nearly all symptoms, however, are calcium pantothenate are ingested, they must also first be pantothenic acid in tissues, with a resulting increase reversed when pantothenic acid is ingested again. The converted by intestinal enzymes before being taken up by the in serum levels. It has therefore been suggested that symptoms are the result of low CoA levels, impaired acetylcholine small intestine. Approximately half of the pantothenic acid in pantothenic acid utilization is impaired in alcoholics.
synthesis and altered carbohydrate and lipid metabolism.
Functions the diet is actually absorbed. Birth control pills containing estrogens and progestin may increase the requirement for pantothenic acid. Homopantothenate is a pantothenic acid antagonist that has
The highest concentrations in the body are found in the liver,
Pantothenic acid, as a metabolically active component of The most common antagonist of pantothenic acid been used in Japan to enhance mental function, especially in adrenal glands, kidneys, brain, heart and testes. Total coenzyme-A (CoA) and acyl carrier protein (ACP, an enzyme used experimentally to accelerate the appearance of Alzheimer's disease patients. However, a rare side effect of this pantothenic acid levels in whole blood range from 1.6 to 2.7
involved in the synthesis of fatty acids), plays a key role in the deficiency symptoms is omega-methyl pantothenic treatment is abnormal brain function resulting from the failure mcMol/L in healthy adults; with most existing as CoA in the red metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins and fats, and is acid. L-pantothenic acid has also been shown to have of the liver to eliminate toxins (hepatic encephalopathy). This blood cells. Urinary excretion in the form of pantothenic acid therefore essential for the maintenance and repair of all cells an antagonistic effect in animal studies. Methyl condition was reversed by pantothenic acid supplementation, generally correlates with dietary intake, but variation is large (2
and tissues in the body. CoA is involved in a broad range of bromide, a fumigant used to control vermin in places suggesting it was due to pantothenic acid deficiency caused by
 - 7 mg daily). During breastfeeding, approximately 40% of a acetyl- and acyl-transfer steps and reactions of the oxidative where food is stored, destroys the pantothenic acid in the antagonist. Interestingly, in experiments with mice it has woman's daily intake reaches her milk.
metabolism and catabolism. Hence it is significant in helping foods exposed to it. been shown that a deficiency of pantothenic acid leads to skin to supply energy. For example, in the process of fat burning Measurement irritation and greying of the fur, which were reversed by giving
(of which the catabolic process is known as β-oxidation), pantothenic acid. Panthenol has since been added to pantothenic acid works with coenzyme-Q10 and L-carnitine to Since vitamin B5 dietary deficiency is practically unknown, shampoo, although it has never been successful in restoring break down fatty acids. ACP, however, is required for biosynthetic little research has been conducted to assess pantothenate hair color in humans.
reactions (also known as anabolic processes) such as observed status in humans. Nutritional status can be deduced from during fatty acid synthesis. amounts of pantothenate excreted in urine. Less than 1 mg Groups at risk daily is considered abnormally low and indicates a deficiency
- Alcoholics
CoA and ACP therefore have various functions, including the in the vitamin. A more thorough, sensitive approach is the biosynthesis of essential lipids (e.g. sphingolipids, determination of pantothenate in serum, or blood, by - Individuals with impaired absorption phospholipids), isoprenoids (e.g. cholesterol, bile salts) and microbiological methods using Lactobacillus plantarum. New steroids (e.g. growth, stress and sex hormones); fatty acid methods, such as HPLC/MS (High Performance Liquid elongation and triglyceride synthesis (energy storage).
Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry) and immunological Recommended daily intakes (RDI) *
Furthermore, CoA and ACP are involved in protein acetylation methods (radioimmunoassay, ELISA) have also been applied.
(e.g. activation of hormones) and acylation (e.g. activation of
Furthermore, CoA activity in the blood may be determined to transcription factors) and in the acetylation of sugars which assess the levels of pantothenic acid in the body. Whole blood Group Life stage Dose/day** are required for certain cell structures.
levels typically range from 0.9 - 1.5 μmol/L.
Infants 0 - 6 months 1.7 mg
CoA is also engaged in the synthesis of neurotransmitters
Stability Infants 7 - 12 months 1.8 mg
(e.g. acetylcholine), porphyrin (a component of hemoglobin
 - the oxygen-carrying red blood cell pigment) and antibodies, Children 1 - 13 years 1.8 - 4 mg
Pantothenic acid is stable under neutral conditions but is as well as the metabolism of drugs (e.g. sulfonamides) and in readily destroyed by heat or in alkaline or acid solutions. Up to Adolescents 14-18 years 5 mg alcohol detoxification.
50% may be lost during cooking and up to 80% as a result of Adults 19 - 70 years 5 mg food processing and refining (including canning, freezing,
Dietary sources Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 6 mg milling etc.). Pasteurization of milk only causes minor losses in
Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 7 mg
The active vitamin is present in virtually all plant, animal vitamin B5, however.
and microbial cells, with about 80% of dietary vitamin B5 in the form of CoA. Its richest sources are yeast and organ meats
* EFSA (2014)
(liver, kidney, heart, brain), but eggs, milk, vegetables, nuts ** Adequate intake (AI) and whole-grain cereals are also common sources of Allowable levels of nutrients vary depending on national regulations and the pantothenic acid. final application.
76 77
Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use prevent urinary retention after surgery or childbirth, and Supplements and food fortification Williams and Truesdail separate an acid fraction
(together with biotin) to prevent baldness. It has also been
Although isolated deficiency states are rarely observed, Pure pantothenic acid is a viscous hygroscopic oil that is from 'bios', the growth 1931
reported to have a protective effect against radiation sickness.
factor for yeast.
several investigators have noted changes in pantothenic acid chemically not very stable. Supplements therefore usually levels in patients affected by various diseases, and Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) contain the calcium salt, or alcohol, panthenol. Both are highly pharmacological amounts of the vitamin are used in the water-soluble and are rapidly converted to the free acid in the treatment of numerous conditions. In most cases, however, the It is widely agreed that there is insufficient information body. Calcium pantothenate is often included in multivitamin claimed therapeutic response has not been confirmed by available on which to base an RDI for pantothenic acid. Most preparations; panthenol is the more common form used in Williams and team show controlled studies in humans. countries that make recommendations therefore give an mono-preparations, which are available in a wide variety of this fraction to be a estimate of safe and adequate levels for daily intake. These pharmaceutical forms (e.g. solutions for injection and local 1933 single acid substance
For the treatment of deficiency due to impaired absorption, essential for the growth
DRIs are based on estimated dietary intakes in healthy application, aerosols, tablets, ointments and creams). of yeast. It is found intravenous or intramuscular injections of 500 mg are population groups and range from 2 to 14 mg for adults. Pantethine, is an active form that is used as a cholesterol and in a wide range of recommended several times a week. Postoperative ileus triglyceride- lowering drug in Europe and Japan and is also biological materials,
(paralysis of the intestine) requires doses of up to 1,000 mg Safety so they suggest calling available in the US as a dietary supplement. Pantothenate is every six hours. Panthenol is applied topically to the skin and Williams and colleagues it 'pantothenic acid'.
mucosa to speed up the healing of wounds, (diabetic) ulcers Pantothenic acid is essentially considered to be non-toxic, and added to a variety of foods, the most important of which are establish the structure no cases of hypervitaminosis have ever been reported. A daily breakfast cereals and beverages, as well as dietetic and of pantothenic acid. 1938
and inflammation, such as cuts and grazes, burns, sunburn, intake of as much as 10 g produces only minor gastrointestinal baby foods.
nappy rash, bed sores, laryngitis and bronchitis. In combination, disturbance (diarrhea) in humans. Pantothenate derivatives pantothenic acid and ascorbic acid significantly enhance Production are not mutagenic in bacterial tests, however high doses post-surgical therapy and wound healing. The healing process of conjunctiva and the cornea after reconstructive surgery of (≤ 10 - 15 g) can cause transient nausea and a lack of fatigue in Pantothenic acid is primarily chemically synthesized by the epithelium has also been accelerated with vitamin B5 humans. Due to the lack of human data detailing adverse effects, condensation of D-pantolactone with β-alanine. Addition of a Kuhn and his team in supplementation. Pantothenic acid has also been used, with the main regulatory authorities have not defined a tolerable calcium salt produces colorless crystals of calcium 1940 H an e d id c e o lb ll e e r a g g , u a e n s d i n K arrer varying levels of success, to treat multiple liver conditions, UL for pantothenic acid. pantothenate, which have 100% purity. Zurich, synthesize arthritis, obesity, acne and constipation in the elderly, to pure riboflavin.
Furthermore, pantothenic acid can be purified through a biotechnological process. Brewer's yeast is considered a low purity natural source.
Lipmann and his group
Panthenol is produced as a clear, almost colorless, viscous identify pantothenic hygroscopic liquid. acid as one of the 1947
components of the coenzyme they had discovered in liver two years earlier.
The full structure of
CoA is elucidated by
1953 Baddiley and colleagues. Lipmann receives the Nobel
Prize, together with
Krebs, for his work on
CoA and its role in
Bean and Hodges metabolism.
report that pantothenic acid is essential in 1954
human nutrition.
Subsequently, they and their colleagues conduct several further studies to produce deficiency symptoms in Pugh and Wakil identify healthy humans using the acyl carrier protein the antagonist 1965 as an additional active omega-methyl form of pantothenic acid.
pantothenic acid.
Fry and team measure the metabolic response of humans 1976
to deprivation.
78 79
Vitamin B6 Vitamin B6
(Pyridoxin)
One of the eight vitamins in the B vitamin group, B6 is essential in helping to
(Pyridoxin) convert glycogen into glucose in the body. Glucose is used to produce energy and make neurotransmitters, which carry signals from one nerve cell to the other. Vitamin B6 is also important for enzymes involved in protein metabolism and it helps to produce hormones, red blood cells and cells of the immune system. Studies show that vitamin B6 is especially important in the elderly, as this group often suffers from impaired immune function.
Vitamin B6 is composed of three forms: mg/100g - Neurotransmitter synthesis pyridoxine or pyridoxol (the alcohol), Brewer's yeast 4.4 - Red blood cell formation pyridoxal (the aldehyde) and
Salmon 0.98 - Niacin formation pyridoxamine (the amine).
Walnuts 0.87 - D egradation of homocysteine
Wheat germ 0.72 to cysteine
Chemistry:
Pork liver 0.59 - I nhibition of steroid hormone
Vitamin B6 is the generic term for all signaling
Lentils 0.57
2-hydroxy 2-methylpyrimidine - Support of immune defense
Avocado 0.53
derivatives exhibiting the biological activity of pyridoxine. Besides the Chicken 0.5
alcohol pyridoxine, these compounds Zucchini 0.46
include the aldehyde pyridoxal and the
Bananas 0.36
amine pyridoxamine and their respective 5'-phosphates (PLP, PNP, and
PMP). All these compounds are nutritionally equivalent and can be metabolically converted to pyridoxalphosphate (PLP) which is the only vitamin B6 compound with known functions as an enzymatic cofactor.
Molecular formula of vitamin B6
8800 888111
Absorption and body stores Stability Recommended daily intakes (RDI) *
All three forms of vitamin B6 (pyridoxine, pyridoxal and
Pyridoxine is relatively stable to heat, but pyridoxal and pyridoxamine) are readily absorbed in the small intestine by pyridoxamine are not. Pasteurization therefore causes milk to Group Life stage Dose/day** an energy dependent process. They are all converted to lose up to 20% of its vitamin B6 content. Vitamin B6 is pyridoxal phosphate in the liver, a process which requires zinc decomposed by oxidation, ultraviolet light and alkaline Infants <6 months 0.1 mg (AI) and riboflavin. The bioavailability of plant-based vitamin B6
environments. Because of this light sensitivity, vitamin B6 will Infants 7 - 12 months 0.3 mg (AI) varies considerably, ranging from 0% to 80%. Some plants disappear (50% within a few hours) from milk kept in glass
Children 1 - 3 years 0.5 mg contain pyridoxine glycosides that cannot be hydrolyzed by bottles exposed to the sun or bright daylight. Alkalis, such as intestinal enzymes. Although these glycosides may be absorbed, Children 4 - 8 years 0.6 mg baking soda, also destroy pyridoxine. The freezing of they do not contribute to vitamin activity. The storage capacity Children 9 - 13 years 1.0 mg vegetables causes a reduction of up to 25%, while milling of of water-soluble vitamins is generally low compared to that of cereals leads to wastes as high as 90%. Cooking losses of Males 14 - 50 years 1.3 mg fat-soluble ones. Small quantities of pyridoxine are widely processed foods may range from a few percent to nearly half Females 14 - 18 years 1.2 mg distributed in body tissue, mainly as PLP in the liver and in the vitamin B6 originally present. Cooking and storage losses
Females 19 - 50 years 1.3 mg muscle. PLP is tightly bound to the protein's albumin and are greater with animal products.
hemoglobin in plasma and red blood cells. Because the Males >51 years 1.7 mg half-life of pyridoxine is about 25 days and it is not significantly Females >51 years 1.7 mg bound to plasma proteins, the limited stores may be depleted
Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 1.9 mg within two to six weeks on a pyridoxin-free diet. Excess
Physiological interactions Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 2.0 mg pyridoxine is primarily excreted in the urine as 4-pyridoxic acid (4-PA) and, to a limited extent, in feces.
- C ertain vitamins of the B-complex (niacin, riboflavin, biotin) may act synergistically with vitamin B6
derivatives. * Institute of Medicine (2001)
There are several direct and indirect methods that can be used
- V itamin B6 additionally requires zinc and magnesium If not otherwise specified, this table presents RDIs. Allowable levels of nutrients for assessing an individual's vitamin B6 status. Direct methods to fulfill its physiological functions. vary depending on national regulations and the final application.
include determination of PLP in plasma, and determination of urinary excretion of 4-pyridoxic acid (4-PA). The method of - T here are more than 40 drugs that interfere with choice for quantification of both compounds is high performance vitamin B6 metabolism, potentially causing low Deficiency liquid chromatography. Whole blood concentrations usually status e.g.
Functions are 35 - 110 nmol/L PLP. Concentrations of PLP have been Vitamin B6 deficiency alone is uncommon, because it usually
- Phenytoin (an antiepileptic drug)
PLP serves as a coenzyme of more than 60 enzymes that found to correlate well with the vitamin B6 deficiency occurs in combination with a deficit in other B-complex catalyze essential chemical reactions in the human body. determined by indirect methods. Indirect methods measure - Theophylline (a drug for respiratory diseases) vitamins, especially with riboflavin, because riboflavin is
It plays an important role in protein, carbohydrate and lipid the stimulated activity of pyridoxine dependent enzymes in - P henobarbitone (a barbiturate mainly used for its needed for the formation of the coenzyme PLP. A recent diet metabolism. It is involved in the production of serotonin erythrocytes by addition of PLP. This mainly determines the antiepileptic properties) survey revealed that a significant part of the following from the amino acid trytophan in the brain and other erythrocyte alanine aminotransferase activation coefficient population groups have B6 intakes below the RDI.
- Desoxypyridoxine (a tuberculostatic drug) neurotransmitters, and so it has a role in the regulation of (EAST-AC) or the erythrocyte aspartate aminotransferase
Groups at risk mental processes and mood. Furthermore, it is involved in the activation coefficient. The coefficient of activity with - Hydralazine (an antihypertensive) conversion of tryptophan to the vitamin niacin, the formation stimulation to activity without stimulation indicates the - The elderly are at risk due to lower food intake, increased B6
- Cycloserine (an antibiotic) of hemoglobin and the growth of red blood cells, the production vitamin B6 status. For EAST-AC, values >1.8 are considered to catabolism and decreased protein binding capacity of prostaglandins and hydrochloric acid in the gastrointestinal show deficiency, 1.7 - 1.8 to be marginal, and <1.7 to be - V itamin B6 reduces the therapeutic effect of
- Pregnant and breastfeeding women (additional demands) tract, the sodium-potassium balance, and in histamine adequate. For large-scale population surveys, the tryptophan levodopa by accelerating its metabolism metabolism. Vitamin B6 also plays a role in the improvement load test is another method of assessing vitamin B6 deficiency. - Women in general, especially those taking oral
- L evodopa reduces vitamin B6 status as the drug of the immune system. Vitamin B6 participates in the conversion of tryptophan to the contraceptives forms a Schiff base complex with PLP vitamin niacin. A vitamin B6 deficiency blocks this process,
- Patients on drugs interacting with B-vitamin metabolism producing more xanthurenic acid. If the administration of tryptophan leads to an increased excretion of xanthurenic - Underweight people or people who eat poorly, (e.g. people
Vitamin B6 is widely distributed in foods and is mainly found in acid, a vitamin B6 deficiency can be diagnosed. with eating disorders) bound forms. Pyridoxine is found in plants, whereas pyridoxal and pyridoxamine are principally found in animal tissue, - Chronic alcoholics (heavy drinking may severely impair the mainly in the form of PLP. ability of the liver to synthesize PLP)
Rich sources of vitamin B6 include chicken and beef, pork and veal liver, fish (salmon, tuna, sardines, halibut, herring), nuts
(walnuts, peanuts), brewer's yeast, and wheat germ.
Generally, vegetables and fruits are rather poor sources of vitamin B6, although there are members of these food classes which contain considerable amounts of pyridoxine, such as lentils, zucchinis, avocados and bananas.
82 83
Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use Immune function Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) Goldberger and colleagues feed rats
Sideroblastic anemias and pyridoxine- dependent The elderly are a group that often suffers from impaired The recommended daily intake of vitamin B6 varies according a diet deficient in what 1926
abnormalities of metabolism immune function. Adequate B6 intake is therefore important, to age, sex, risk group (see 'Groups at risk') and criteria applied. is considered to be the and it has been shown that the amount of vitamin B6 required pellagra-preventive
Pyridoxine is an approved treatment for sideroblastic anemias to improve the immune system is higher than the current RDI Vitamin B6 requirement is increased when high-protein diets factor; these animals and pyridoxine- dependent abnormalities of metabolism. In are consumed, since protein metabolism can only function develop skin lesions.
(2.4 mg/day for men; 1.9 mg/day for women).
such cases, therapeutic doses of approximately 40 - 200 mg properly with the assistance of vitamin B6 derivatives.
vitamin B6 per day are indicated. Vitamin B6 deficiency is also Asthma Pregnant and breastfeeding women need an additional György first identifies associated with hypochromic microcytic anemia. Asthma patients taking vitamin B6 supplements may have 0.7 mg to compensate for increased demands made by the the factor as vitamin B6
fewer, and less severe, attacks of wheezing, coughing and fetus or baby. 1934 or adermin, a substance
PMS (premenstrual syndrome) capable of curing breathing difficulties. Safety a characteristic skin
Some studies suggest that vitamin B6 doses of up to 100 mg/ disease in rats day may be beneficial for relieving the symptoms of Diabetes (dermatitis acrodynia).
Vitamin B6 in all its forms is well tolerated, but large amounts premenstrual syndrome. The factor is then called
Research has also suggested that certain patients with diabetes are toxic. Daily oral doses of pyridoxine of up to 50 times the the rat anti-acro-dynia
Hyperemesis gravidarum mellitus or gestational diabetes experience an improvement in RDI (ca. 100 mg) for periods of 3 - 4 years have been factor, deficiency of glucose tolerance when given vitamin B6 supplements. administered without adverse effects. Daily doses of 500 mg which causes so-called
Pyridoxine is often administered in doses of up to 40 mg/day and more may cause sensory neuropathy after several years of 'rat-pellagra'.
Kidney stones in the treatment of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy ingestion, whereas the intake of amounts in excess of 1 gram
(hyperemesis gravidarum). Glyoxylate can be oxidized to oxalic acid that may then lead to daily may lead to reversible sensory neuropathy within a few
Birch and György calcium oxalate kidney stones. Pyridoxal phosphate is a months. Sensory neuropathy has been selected as a critical succeed in
Depression cofactor for the degradation of glyoxylate to glycine. There is end-point on which to base a tolerable upper intake level (UL) differentiating 1935
Pyridoxine is also used to assist in the relief of depression some evidence that high doses of vitamin B6 (>150 mg/day) of 100 mg/day (IOM) for adults, although supplements riboflavin and vitamin B6
from the specific especially in women taking oral contraceptives. However, may be useful for normalizing the oxalic acid metabolism to somewhat higher than this may be safe for most individuals.
pellagra preventive clinical trials have not yet provided evidence for its efficacy. reduce the formation of kidney stones. However, the Fortunately, these side-effects are largely reversible upon factor (P-P) of relationship between B6 and kidney stones must be studied cessation of vitamin B6 intake. EFSA (2006) set a UL of 25 mg/ Goldberger and
Carpal tunnel syndrome further before any definite conclusions can be drawn. day. Today, prolonged intake of doses exceeding 500 mg a day his team.
Pyridoxine has been claimed to alleviate the symptoms of is considered to carry the risk of side-effects.
carpal tunnel syndrome. Glutamate sensitivity Lepkovsky is the first to
People who are sensitive to glutamate, which is often used for report the isolation of
Hyperhomocystinaemia/cardiovascular disease (CVD) the preparation of Asiatic dishes, can react with headache, 1938 pure crystalline vitamin
The most commonly available form of vitamin B6 is pyridoxine
B6. Independently, but
Elevated homocysteine levels in the blood are considered a tachycardia (accelerated heart rate), and nausea. 50 to 100 mg hydrochloride, which is used in food fortification, nutritional slightly later, several risk factor for atherosclerotic disease. Several studies have of pyridoxine can then be of therapeutic value. supplements and therapeutic products such as capsules, other groups of shown that vitamin B6, vitamin B12 and folic acid can lower tablets and ampoules. Vitamins, mostly of the B-complex, are researchers also report critical homocysteine levels. Autism widely used in the enrichment of cereals. Dietetic foods such the isolation of crystallized vitamin B6
High dose therapy with pyridoxine improves the status of as infant formulas and slimming diets are often fortified with from rice polishing autistics in about 30% of cases. vitamins, including pyridoxine. (Keresztesy and Stevens;
György; Kuhn and Wendt;
Ichiba and Michi).
Harris and Folkers determine the structure of pyridoxine and 1939
succeed in synthesizing the vitamin. György proposes the name pyridoxine.
Snell demonstrates that two other natural forms
1945 of the vitamin exist, namely pyridoxal and pyridoxamine.
Snyderman determines the levels of vitamin B6

required by humans.
84 85
Vitamin B7 Vitamin B7
(Biotin)
Biotin, or vitamin B7, is only needed in very small amounts and helps to
(Biotin) metabolize proteins and form glucose. It can be synthesized by bacteria, molds, yeasts, algae and other plant species. Any unused biotin is eliminated in urine, so the body does not build up reserves. As such, it must be consumed daily from the diet.
Vitamin H ('Haar und Haut', German μg/100g - P roduce fatty acids and amino words for 'hair and skin') and Brewer's yeast 115 acids (the building blocks for protein co-enzyme R. and lipids)
Beef liver 100
- C onvert food into glucose, which is
Soya beans 60
Chemistry: used to produce energy
Wheat bran 45
- A ctivate protein and amino acid
Biotin has a bicyclic ring structure. One Peanuts 35
metabolism in cells ring contains a ureido group and the
Eggs 25
- M aintenance of healthy hair, skin other contains a heterocyclic sulfur
White mushrooms 16 and nails atom and a valeric acid side-group.
(Hexahydro-2-oxo- 1H-thieno [3,4-] Spinach 6.9
dimidazole-4-pentanoic acid). Bananas 6
Biologically active analogues: biocytin
Strawberries 4
(ε-N-biotinyl-L-lysine), oxybiotin
Whole wheat bread 2
(S substituted with O).
Asparagus 2
Molecular formula of biotin
8866 888777
Absorption and body stores Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use
In most foods, biotin is bound to proteins from which it is There is no direct evidence that marginal biotin deficiency released in the intestine by protein hydrolysis and a specific - R aw egg whites contain avidin, a glycoprotein that causes birth defects in humans, but adequate biotin intake enzyme, biotinidase. Biotin is then absorbed unchanged in the strongly binds to biotin and prevents its absorption in during pregnancy is advisable. Biotin is used clinically to treat upper part of the small intestine by an electron-neutral the body. As such, the ingestion of large quantities of the biotin-responsive inborn errors of metabolism, sodium (Na+) gradient dependent carrier-mediated process, raw egg white over a long period can result in a biotin holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency and biotinidase and also by slow passive diffusion when at therapeutic doses. deficiency. It has also been reported that antibiotics, deficiency. Large doses of biotin may be given to babies with a
The carrier is regulated by the availability of biotin, with which damage the intestinal flora (thus decreasing condition called infantile seborrhea, or to patients with genetic up-regulation of the number of transporter molecules when bacterial synthesis), can also reduce biotin abnormalities in biotin metabolism. A large number of reports biotin is deficient. The colon is also able to absorb biotin via concentrations. Interactions with certain anticonvulsant has shown a beneficial effect of biotin in infant seborrheic an analogue transport mechanism. Once absorbed, biotin is drugs and alcohol have been reported, as they may dermatitis, Leiner's disease (a generalized form of seborrheic distributed to all tissues. The liver and kidney are the main inhibit intestinal carrier-mediated transport of biotin. dermatitis) and also palmoplantar pustulosis. Individuals with storage places. Biotin metabolites are not active as vitamins Finally, pantothenic acid ingested in large amounts type 2 diabetes often have low concentrations of biotin. In some and are excreted in the urine. High amounts of biotin, competes with biotin for intestinal and cellular uptake diabetic patients, it has been advised that there may be an synthesized by colonic bacteria, also appear in feces. because they both use the same transporter. abnormality in the biotin-dependent enzyme pyruvate carboxylase, which can lead to dysfunction of the nervous system.
The main benefit of biotin as a dietary supplement is in
The status of biotin in the body can be determined by strengthening hair and nails. Uncombable hair syndrome in measuring the activity and/or activation of biotin-dependent Deficiency children also improves with biotin supplementation, as do enzymes - predominately carboxylases. More convenient certain skin disorders, such as 'cradle cap'.
Human biotin deficiency is extremely rare. This is probably methods, however, are the direct determination of biotin in due to the fact that biotin is synthesized by beneficial bacteria Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) plasma or serum by microbiological methods or avidin binding in the human digestive tract. Symptoms of deficiency include assays, or determination of biotin excretion and
Functions 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid in urine. Measurement of biotin in hair loss, dry scaly skin, cracking lips, depression, lethargy, In 1998, the Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of hallucination, numbness and tingling of the extremities, as Medicine felt the existing scientific evidence was insufficient to plasma is not a reliable indicator of nutritional status as
In the body, biotin plays a key role in the metabolism of lipids, well as ataxia. calculate an EAR, and thus an RDI, for biotin. Instead an AI reported concentrations for biotin in the blood vary widely.
proteins and carbohydrates. The enzyme holocarboxylase level has been defined. The AI for biotin assumes that current
Thus, a low plasma-biotin concentration is not a sensitive synthetase (HLCS) is required to chemically bond biotin to its Groups at risk average intakes of biotin (35 μg to 60 μg/day) are meeting the indicator of inadequate intake. Usual serum concentrations target enzymes. These act as carboxylases and are inactive in are 100 - 400 pmol/L. - Patients dependent on total intravenous nutrition dietary requirement. The present recommended daily intake in the absence of the biotin prosthetic group: the US is 20 - 30 μg daily for adults and children over 9 years,
Stability - Dialysis patients and 5 - 12 μg daily for infants and younger children. EFSA
- Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (involved in the synthesis of fatty recommends the AI of biotin for adults and pregnant women
- Individuals receiving some forms of long-term acids from acetate)
Biotin is relatively stable when heated and therefore not easily should be set at 40 μg per day - adding an additional 5 μg anticonvulsant therapy
- Pyruvate carboxylase (involved in gluconeogenesis, i.e. the destroyed in the process of cooking, but it will filter into daily for breastfeeding women. For infants, the amount generation of glucose from lactate, glycerol, and amino acids) cooking water. The processing of food, e.g. canning, can cause - Individuals with biotinidase deficiency or holocarboxylase provided by breastmilk is considered adequate, therefore for a moderate reduction in biotin content. synthetase (HCS) deficiency (genetic defects) infants older than six months an AI of 6 μg per day is
- β-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (necessary for the extrapolated from the breastmilk intake.
- Patients with malabsorption, including short-bowel syndrome metabolism of leucin, an essential amino acid)
- People who eat large amounts of raw egg white
- Propionyl-CoA carboxylase (involved in energy metabolism, Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * necessary for the catabolism of some amino acids and - Pregnant women may experience marginal biotin deficiency odd- chain fatty acids)
Furthermore, biotin may have a role in DNA replication and transcription arising from its interaction with nuclear histone
Infants <6 months 5 μg (AI) proteins. Its reputation as the 'beauty vitamin' is due to the
Infants 7 - 12 months 6 μg (AI) fact that it activates protein/amino acid metabolism in the hair roots and nail cells. Children 1 - 3 years 8 μg (AI)
Children 4 - 8 years 12 μg (AI)
Children 9 - 13 years 20 μg (AI)
Biotin is widely distributed in most foods, where it is found in Children 14 - 18 years 25 μg (AI) free and protein-bound forms. However, it occurs at very low
Adults >19 years 30 μg (AI) concentrations compared to other water-soluble vitamins. Its
Pregnancy >19 years 30 μg (AI) richest sources are yeast, liver and kidney, as well as vegetables. Egg yolk, soy beans, nuts and cereals are also good Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 35 μg (AI) sources. As an example, 100 g of liver contains approximately
100 μg biotin, whereas most other meats, vegetables and fruits only contain approximately 1 μg biotin /100 g. * Institute of Medicine (2001)
88 89
Safety require life-long biotin therapy in milligram doses (5 - 10 mg/ History day). Patients with HCS deficiency require supplementation of
No known toxicity has been associated with biotin. Biotin has
40 - 100 mg/day. If biotin therapy is introduced in infancy, the been administered in doses as high as 40 mg per day without prognosis for both these genetic defects is good. A daily Wildiers discovers that Total synthesis of biotin objectionable effects. As a result, no major regulatory supplement of 60 μg biotin for adults and 20 μg for children yeast requires a special by Harris and colleagues authorities have established a UL for biotin. 1901 growth factor which he 1943 in the US.
has been recommended to maintain normal plasma names 'bios.' Over the concentrations in patients on total parenteral nutrition.
Supplements and other applications next 30 years, bios proves to be a mixture of
Biotin, usually either in the form of crystalline D-biotin or essential factors, one of brewer's yeast, is added to many dietary supplements, infant which - bios IIB - is biotin. Goldberg and Sternbach
Commercial synthesis of biotin is based on a method develop a technique milk formulas and baby foods, as well as various dietetic developed by Goldberg and Sternbach in 1949, which uses for the industrial 1949
products. As a supplement, biotin is often included in fumaric acid as starting material. This technique produces a production of biotin.
combinations of the B vitamins. Mono-preparations of biotin are pure D-biotin that is identical to the natural product. Bateman observes the available in some countries as oral and parenteral formulations. detrimental effect of feeding high doses of raw 1916
Therapeutic doses of biotin range between 5 and 20 mg daily. egg white to animals.
Seborrheic dermatitis and Leiner's disease in infants respond Traub confirms the to daily doses of 5 mg. Patients with biotinidase deficiency structure of biotin by
1956 X-ray analysis.
Boas confirms the findings of dermatosis
1927 and hair loss in rats fed with raw egg white. She shows that this egg white Lynen's group describes injury can be cured by a the biological function of
'protective factor X' found biotin and paves the way 1959
in the liver. for further studies on the carboxylase enzymes.
György also discovers this factor in the liver and calls it vitamin H. 1931 First description of an inborn error of biotin1971 dependent carboxylase metabolism by Gompertz
Kögl and Tönnis extract a and his team.
crystalline growth factor
1935 from dried egg yolk and suggest the name 'biotin'.
Burri and her colleagues show that the early
György and his team infantile form of multiple 1981
conclude that biotin, carboxylase deficiency is vitamin H and coenzyme 1940 due to a mutation
R are identical. They also affecting holocarboxylase succeed in isolating synthetase activity.
biotin from the liver.
Kögl and his group in Burri and team suggest
Europe, and du Vigneaud that late-onset multiple
1942 and his colleagues 1983 carboxylase deficiency in the US, establish the results from a deficiency structure of biotin. in biotinidase activity.
Sydenstricker and colleagues demonstrate the need for biotin in 1942
the human diet.
90 91
Vitamin B9 Vitamin B9
(Folic acid)
Vitamin B9 is known by many as folate and plays an essential role in making
(Folic acid) and repairing DNA and producing red blood cells. Folate-rich foods include leafy, green vegetables, eggs, beans and lentils, shellfish and fruits. As the vitamin is extremely important during early pregnancy (in the prevention of neural tube defects), it is recommended that expectant mothers or women who are hoping to conceive take folate supplements during this period.
Folate, folacin, folinic acid. μg/100g - N ormal cell division
Beef liver 592 - P roper growth and optimal functioning
Chemistry: Peanuts 169 of the bone marrow
Spinach 145 - Normal blood formation
Folic acid consists of a pteridine ring system, p-aminobenzoic acid and one Broccoli 114 - Normal homocysteine molecule of glutamic acid (chemical Asparagus 108 - N ormal maternal tissue growth during name: pteroylglutamic acid). pregnancy
Eggs 67
Naturally-occurring folates are - N ormal metabolism of the immune
Strawberries 43
pteroylpolyglutamic acids with two system to eight glutamic acid groups. Orange juice (freshly squeezed) 41
Tomatoes 22
Milk (whole) 6.7
Molecular formula of folic acid
9922 999333
Functions Absorption and body stores Stability Deficiency
Tetrahydrofolate, which is the active form of folate in the body, Most natural dietary folates exist as polyglutamates, which Most naturally-occurring forms of folate in food are unstable. Folate deficiency can result from inadequate intake, defective acts as a co-enzyme in numerous essential metabolic reactions, must be converted to the mono-glutamate form in the gut For instance, fresh leafy vegetables stored at room absorption, abnormal metabolism or an increased requirement with folate co-enzymes acting as acceptors and donors of before absorption. The mono-glutamate form is absorbed in temperature may lose up to 70% of their folate activity within for the vitamin. Diagnosis of a subclinical deficiency relies on one-carbon units. Folate co-enzymes play an important role in the proximal small intestine by an active carrier-mediated three days. Up to 95% of folate can also be lost during cooking the demonstration of reduced red cell folate concentration, or the metabolism of several amino acids, the constituents of transport mechanism, and also by passive diffusion. Ingested through leaching and also exposure to heat. Folic acid, which other biochemical evidence such as increased homocysteine proteins. The synthesis of the amino acid methionine from folic acid is enzymatically reduced and methylated in the is commonly found in supplements and fortified foods, is more concentration. Early symptoms of folate deficiency are homocysteine, for example, requires a folate co-enzyme in mucosa cells. The predominant form of folate in the plasma is stable than natural folates. non-specific and may include tiredness, irritability and loss of addition to vitamin B12. Folate is also involved in the synthesis 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF). Folates are widely appetite. Severe folate deficiency leads to megaloblastic of nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) - the molecules that carry distributed in the body's tissues, primarily as polyglutamate anemia, a condition in which the bone marrow produces giant, genetic information in cells - and in the formation of blood derivatives. The main storage organ is the liver, which contains immature red blood cells. At an advanced stage of anemia, cells. Folates are therefore essential for normal cell division about half of the overall stores. Physiological interactions symptoms of weakness, fatigue, shortness of breath, irritability, and proper growth, as well as for normal fetal development. headaches and palpitations appear. Gastrointestinal problems
In addition, folates are required for the prevention of anemia. Bioavailability - E fficient folate utilization depends on an adequate may also result from severe folate deficiency, whereas supply of other vitamins in the B-vitamin group, such deficiency during pregnancy can result in premature birth, low
Absorption of folic acid reaches almost 100% when it is
Dietary sources as vitamins B12 and B6, as they are involved in the birth weight or reduced fetal development. In children, growth consumed under fasting conditions. When folic acid is consumed chemical reactions needed for folate metabolism. may be stunted and puberty could be delayed.
Folates are found in a wide variety of foods, but in relatively with a portion of food, bioavailability is estimated to be 85%
Vitamin C may also provide the conditions needed to low densities. Its richest sources are liver, dark green leafy compared with free folic acid. The bioavailability of food Folate deficiency is very common in many parts of the world preserve folates in the diet. However, a diet deficient vegetables, beans, wheat germ and yeast. Other natural folates is variable and incomplete. In fact, it has been estimated and is therefore considered a global nutritional challenge.
in folates is also likely to be deficient in vitamin C.
sources are egg yolk, milk and dairy products, beets, orange to be less than half that of folic acid. Reduced folate intake is often seen in people on special diets juice and whole wheat bread. Fortified foods, such as breakfast - S everal chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. methotrexate, (e.g. weight-reducing diets) or disorders of the stomach cereals are among the best dietary sources of folate because trimethoprim, pyrimethamine) inhibit the enzyme (e.g. atrophic gastritis) and small intestine (e.g. celiac disease, they provide the vitamin as folic acid, a highly bioavailable dihydrofolate reductase, which is necessary for the sprue, Crohn's disease), where folate deficiency may be the
Different methods are used for the measurement of folates in vitamin form. metabolism of folates. When nonsteroidal anti- result of malabsorption. In conditions with a high rate of cell foods and human tissue, including blood levels. Folates can be inflammatory drugs (e.g. aspirin, ibuprofen) are taken turnover (e.g. cancer, certain anemias and skin disorders),
Folates synthesized by intestinal bacteria do not contribute measured by microbiological assay using Lactobacillus casei in very large therapeutic doses, for example in the folate requirements are increased. This is also the case during significantly to folate nutrition in humans. This is because as a test organism; this approach is considered to be the gold treatment of severe arthritis, folate metabolism may both pregnancy and breastfeeding. People undergoing drug bacterial folate synthesis is usually restricted to the large standard method for folate measurement but tends to be used be disrupted. treatment, e.g. for epilepsy, cancer or an infection, are at high intestine (colon), whereas absorption occurs mainly in the in research rather than in clinical settings.
risk of developing a folate deficiency, as are patients with renal upper part of the small intestine (jejunum). - M any drugs may also interfere with the absorption,
Radio assays, based on competitive protein binding, are failure who require regular hemodialysis. Acute folate utilization and storage of folates. These include simpler to perform and are not affected by antibiotics, which deficiencies have been reported to occur within a relatively alcohol, cholestyramine and colestipol, which are give false low values in microbiological assays. High- performance short time in patients undergoing intensive care, especially used to lower blood cholesterol and antiepileptic liquid chromatography (HPLC) methods have also been those on total parenteral nutrition.
agents such as phenytoin, as well as diphenylestablished for the analysis of folates in human tissue and in hydantoin and sulfasalazine, which are used in the foods. Folate status is assessed by measuring serum and red treatment of ulcerative colitis. Drugs that reduce blood cell folate levels of methyltetrahydrofolate, which is the acidity in the intestine, such as antacids and modern predominant folate. Serum folate level is considered a anti-ulcer drugs, have also been reported to interfere sensitive indicator of recent folate intake, with serum with the absorption of folic acid. Early studies of oral concentrations <7 nmol/L (3 ng/ml) likely to indicate a negative contraceptives containing high levels of estrogen folate balance. Levels in the red blood cells are a better suggested an adverse effect on folate status, but this indicator of long-term status and to be representative of tissue has not been supported by more recent studies on folate stores. Levels <305 nmol/L (140 ng/ml) indicate low dose oral contraceptives.
inadequate folate status. Increased homocysteine levels may also indicate folate deficiency. Methyltetrahydrofolate is necessary for the conversion of homocysteine to methionine.
Therefore, plasma homocysteine concentration increases when folate is not available in sufficient quantities. Although plasma homocysteine concentration is a sensitive indicator, it is not highly specific because it may be influenced by other nutrient deficiencies (such as vitamins B12 or B6), genetic abnormalities and renal insufficiency.
94 95
Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use Safety History
In situations where there is a risk of folate deficiency, daily oral Oral folic acid is not considered to be toxic to humans.
folic acid supplementation is recommended, usually in However, it has been claimed that high doses of folic acid may
Wills observes the effect Herbert consumes a a multivitamin preparation containing 400 μg of folic acid. counteract the effect of antiepileptic medication and so of liver and yeast extracts folate-deficient diet for increase the frequency of seizures in susceptible patients. 1931 in treating tropical 1962 several months and
It has been demonstrated that peri- conceptional (before and
Folic acid at very high doses can also potentially mask vitamin macrocytic anemia and records his development during the first 28 days after conception) supplementation concludes that this of deficiency symptoms.
B12 deficiency and thereby delay its diagnosis. It should of women with folic acid can decrease the risk of neural tube disorder must be due His findings set the therefore not be used indiscriminately in patients with anemia defects by 72 - 100%. Therefore, a daily intake of 600 μg folic to a dietary deficiency. criteria for the diagnosis because of the risk of damage to the nervous system due to She recognizes that yeast of folate deficiency. In the acid, in addition to a healthy diet eight weeks prior to and vitamin B12 deficiency. The US Food and Nutrition Board contains a curative same year, Herbert during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy is recommended
(FNB) (1998) set the UL of folic acid from fortified foods or agent equal in potency estimates the folic acid globally to women of reproductive age. to that of liver. requirements for adults, supplements at 1 mg/day for adults.
which still serve as a
There is evidence that adequate folate status may also reduce basis for many RDIs.
the risk of the incidence of other birth defects, including cleft lip and palate, certain heart defects and limb malformations. Wald establishes that folic
Folic acid is available as oral preparations alone or in Hogan and Parrott
Results from intervention studies have shown that a acid supplementation combination with other vitamins or minerals (e.g. iron), or as identify an antianemia reduces risk of neural 1991
multivitamin supplement containing folic acid is more effective an aqueous solution for injection. As the acid is poorly soluble factor for chicks in liver 1939 tube defects by 70% in decreasing the risk of neural tube defects and other birth extracts, which they in water, folate salts are used to prepare liquid dosage forms. among women who defects than folic acid alone. Folinic acid (also known as leucovorin or citrovorum factor) is name 'vitamin BC'. have already given birth to a child with such
Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) a derivative of folic acid administered by intramuscular birth defects.
injection to circumvent the action of dihydrofolate reductase
To set the new dietary recommendation for vitamin B9, the inhibitors, such as methotrexate. It is not otherwise indicated Discovery of growth Butterworth finds that
Dietary Folate Equivalent (DFE) has been used, reflecting the for the prevention or treatment of folic acid deficiency. factors for Lactobacillus higher than normal higher bioavailability of synthetic folic acid in supplements 1940 casei and Streptococcus 1992 serum levels of folic acid and fortified foods compared to that of naturally occurring Folic acid is added to a variety of foods, the most important of lactis. Snell and are associated with which are flour, breakfast cereals, certain beverages, salt and Peterson coin the term decreased risk of cervical food folates. 1 μg of food folate provides 1 μg of DFE for example.
baby foods. 'norite-eluate factor'. cancer in women
1 μg of folic acid taken with meals or as fortified food provides infected with human
1.7 μg DFE. 1 μg of folic acid (supplement) taken on an empty To reduce the risk of neural tube defects, cereal grains are papillomavirus. Also, stomach provides 2 μg DFE. It is recommended that adults fortified with folic acid in some countries. In the US and Czeizel demonstrates that first-time occurrence of consume 400 μg daily, whereas pregnant women need 600 μg. Canada, for example, all enriched cereal grains (e.g. enriched
Mitchell and colleagues neural tube defects may bread, pasta, flour, breakfast cereals, and rice) are required to suggest the name 'folic be largely eliminated with be fortified with folic acid. acid' (folium is Latin for 1941 a multivitamin containing leaf) for the factor folic acid taken in the
Production responsible for growth periconceptional period.
stimulation of
Folic acid is manufactured on a large scale by chemical Streptococcus lactis, The US Public Health synthesis, using a variety of processes. which they isolate from Service recommends that spinach and suspect of all women of childbearing 1993
having vitamin-like age consume 0.4 mg properties for animals. (400 μg) of folate daily in
Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * order to reduce the risk of fetal malformations such as spina bifida and
Group Life stage Dose/day** other neural tube defects.
Angier and team report the synthesis of a
Infants <6 months 65 μg (AI) 1945 compound identical to Fortification of all enriched cereal grains
Infants 7 - 12 months 80 μg (AI) the L. casei factor 1998 (e.g. enriched bread, isolated from liver.
Children 1 - 3 years 150 μg They later describe the pasta, flour, rice and breakfast cereals) with
Children 4 - 8 years 200 μg chemical structures folic acid becomes of the basic and related
Children 9 - 13 years 300 μg compounds. mandatory in the US and in Canada. In Hungary,
Adults >14 years 400 μg wheat flour is fortified
Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 600 μg with folic acid.
Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 600 μg
Spies demonstrates that Mandatory fortification of folic acid cures wheat flour with folic acid megaloblastic anemia 1945 is established in Chile. 2000
during pregnancy.
* Adequate intake (AI)
96 97
Vitamin B12 Vitamin B12
(Cyanocobalamin)
Vitamin B12, which is only found in foods of animal origin, is the largest and
(Cyanocobalamin) most complex of all the vitamins. In the body, the vitamin supports the development of red blood cells and DNA, maintains healthy nerve cells and releases energy from food. Mild deficiencies of B12 are not uncommon in elderly people, usually due to poor diet or because individuals have less stomach acid which is needed to absorb the vitamin.
Cobalamin, Coenzyme B12, μg/100g - C oenzyme-function in intermediary
Adenosylcobalmin, AdoCbl Beef liver 65 metabolism, especially in cells of the cobamamide, Antipernicious-anemia nervous tissue, bone marrow and
Crab 27
factor, Castle's extrinsic factor, animal gastrointestinal tract
Blue mussel 8
protein factor. - Essential growth factor
Steak 5
- F ormation of blood cells and
Chemistry: Coalfish 3.5 myelin sheaths
Cheese (Camembert) 3
- Regeneration of folate
The structure of vitamin B12 is based
Eggs 1 - 3
on a corrin ring, which has two of the - I nvolved in the production of pyrrole rings directly bonded. (Souci, Fachmann, Kraut) melatonin (controls the release of
The central metal ion is Co (cobalt). Four many hormones in the body and is of the six coordinations are provided by involved with the sleep/wake cycle) the corrin ring nitrogens, and a fifth by a dimethylbenzimidazole group.
The sixth coordination partner varies, being a cyano group (-CN)
(cyanocobalamin), a hydroxyl group
(-OH) (hydroxycobalamin), a methyl group (-CH3) (methylcobalamin) or a
5'-deoxyadenosyl group
(5-deoxyadenosylcobalamin).
Molecular formula of vitamin B12
9988 9999
Measurement of vitamin B12 in plasma is routinely used to determine deficiency but may not be a reliable indication in all - A bsorption of cobalamins is impaired by alcohol and cases. In pregnancy, for example, tissue levels are normal, but vitamin B6 deficiency. Furthermore, a number of serum levels are low. Vitamin B12 can be measured by drugs reduce the absorption of vitamin B12, and chemical, microbiological or immunoassay isotope dilution supplementation with the affected nutrient may methods. Microbiological assays, which are widely used for be necessary:
blood and tissue samples, are sensitive but non-specific.
- Antibiotics (e.g. chloramphenicol)
Serum cobalamin concentration is often determined
- Anti-diabetics (e.g. metformin and phenformin) by automated immunoassays using intrinsic factor as a binding agent. These assays have mainly replaced - A nti-epileptic drugs microbiological methods.
- A nti-gout medication (Colchicine)
Data in literature about vitamin B12 serum concentration
- S tomach medication (H2 receptor antagonists, varies. However, values under 110 - 150 pmol/L are considered
Proton pump inhibitors)
Functions Absorption and body stores to reflect deficiency, whereas values over 150 - 200 pmol/L represent an adequate status. Major vitamin B12-dependent - N itrous oxide (anesthetic)
Vitamin B12 is necessary for the formation of blood cells, nerve Vitamin B12 from food sources is bound to proteins and only metabolic processes include the formation of methionine from
- O ral contraceptives sheaths and various proteins. It is therefore essential for the released by an adequate concentration of hydrochloric acid in homocysteine, and the formation of succinyl coenzyme A from prevention of pernicious anemia and neurological disturbances. the stomach. Free vitamin B12 is then immediately bound to methylmalonyl coenzyme A. Thus, apart from directly - Tuberculostatics (Para-aminosalicylic acid)
It is also involved in fat and carbohydrate metabolism and is glycoproteins originating from the stomach and salivary determining vitamin B12 concentration in the blood, elevated
- Several anticonvulsants - phenobarbitone, primidone, essential for growth. In humans, vitamin B12 functions primarily glands. This glycoprotein complex protects vitamin B12 from concentrations of both methylmalonic acid (MMA) and phenytoin and ethylphenacemide - can alter the as a cofactor in intermediary metabolism. Two enzymes are chemical denaturation. Gastrointestinal absorption of vitamin homocysteine may indicate a vitamin B12 deficiency. Vitamin metabolism of cobalamins in the cerebrospinal fluid dependent on vitamin B12: B12 occurs in the small intestine by an active process requiring B12 concentrations can also be measured using the novel and lead to neuropsychic disturbances. Several the presence of an intrinsic factor, another glycoprotein, which biomarker holoTC.
1 Methionine synthase which converts homo- cysteine to substituted amide, lactone and lactam analogues of the gastric parietal cells secrete after being stimulated by methionine food. The absorption of physiological doses of vitamin B12 is Stability cyanocobalamin compete with binding sites on intrinsic factor and lead to depressed absorption of
2 Methylmalonyl CoA mutase which converts methylmalonyl limited to approximately 2μg/dose. The vitamin B12 intrinsic
Vitamin B12 is stable to heat, but slowly loses its activity when the vitamin. Nitrous oxide (anesthetic) also interferes
CoA to succinyl CoA factor complex is then absorbed through phagocytosis by exposed to light, oxygen and acid or alkali-containing with cobalamin metabolism.
specific ileal receptors. Once absorbed, the vitamin is
In its methylcobalamin form vitamin B12 is the direct cofactor environments. Loss of activity during cooking is due to the transferred to a plasma-transport protein which delivers the for methionine synthase, the enzyme that recycles water solubility of vitamin B12 rather than its destruction.
vitamin to target cells. A lack of intrinsic factor prevents homocysteine back to methionine. In addition, methionine vitamin B12 absorption. If this is untreated, potentially synthase and vitamin B12 are involved in the production of irreversible neurological damage and life- threatening anemia Recommended daily intakes (RDI) * the active forms of folate and low vitamin B12 may disrupt develops (see Deficiency).
folate metabolism.
Regardless of dose, approximately 1% of vitamin B12 is
Methylmalonyl CoA mutase converts 1-methylmalonyl CoA to Group Life stage Dose/day** absorbed by passive diffusion, so this process becomes succinyl CoA (an important reaction in lipid and carbohydrate quantitatively important at pharmacological levels of Infants <6 months 0.4 μg (AI) metabolism). Adenosylcobalamin is also the coenzyme in exposure. Once absorbed, vitamin B12 is stored principally ribonucleotide reduction (which provides building blocks for Infants 7 - 12 months 0.5 μg (AI)
(60%) in the liver. The average B12 content is approximately 1.0
DNA synthesis). Children 1 - 3 years 0.9 μg mg in healthy adults, with 20 - 30 μg found in the kidneys,
Dietary sources heart, spleen and brain. Estimates of total vitamin B12 body Children 4 - 8 years 1.2 μg content for adults range from 0.6 to 3.9 mg with mean values Children 9 - 13 years 1.8 μg
Vitamin B12 is produced exclusively by microbial synthesis in of 2 - 3 mg. The normal range of vitamin B12 plasma
Adults >14 years 2.4 μg the digestive tract of animals. Therefore, animal protein concentrations is 150 - 750 pg/ml, with peak levels achieved 8
Pregnancy 14 - 50 years 2.6 μg products are the main source of vitamin B12 in the human diet. - 12 hours after ingestion.
Other sources include fish, eggs and dairy products. In foods, Breastfeeding 14 - 50 years 2.8 μg
Excretion of vitamin B12 is proportional to stores and occurs hydroxy-, methyl- and 5'-deoxy- adenosyl-cobalamins are the mainly by urinary and fecal routes. Vitamin B12 is very main cobalamins present. Bacteria in the intestine synthesize efficiently conserved by the body, with 65 - 75% re-absorption vitamin B12, but not in areas where absorption occurs.
in the ileum of the 0.5 - 5 μg excreted into the alimentary tract * Institute of Medicine (2001)
Some foods are also fortified with vitamin B12.
per day (mainly into the bile). This helps to explain the slow ** Adequate intake (AI)
If not otherwise specified, this table presents Recommended Dietary Allowances development (over several years) of deficiency states in
(RDIs). Allowable levels of nutrients vary depending on national regulations and subjects with negligible vitamin B12 intake, such as vegans.
the final application.
Patients with a lack of intrinsic factor (i.e. pernicious anemia) will rapidly develop vitamin B12 deficiency as they can only absorb small amounts of the vitamin.
100 101
Deficiency Cancer The first case of pernicious anemia and
Vitamin B12 deficiency may lead to an elevated rate of DNA 1824
Vitamin B12 deficiency affects 10 - 15% of individuals over the its possible relation damage and altered methylation of DNA. These are obvious age of 60. to disorders of risk factors for cancer. In a recent study, chromosome the digestive system
Deficiency of vitamin B12 leads to defective DNA synthesis in breakage was minimized in young adults by supplementation is described by Combe. Combe and Addison cells, which affects the growth and repair of all cells. The tissues with 700 μg of folic acid and 7 μg of vitamin B12 daily in cereals identify clinical

most affected are those with the greatest rate of cell turnover, for two months. symptoms of pernicious anemia.
e.g. those of the hematopoietic system. This can lead to
Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) megaloblastic anemia (characterized by large and immature
Whipple and Robscheitred blood cells) and neuropathy, with numerous symptoms
The US Institute of Medicine (IOM) recommends that anyone Robbins discover the including: glossitis, weakness, loss of appetite, loss of taste over 50 years should consume most of their vitamin B12 from benefits of consuming 1925
and smell, impotence, irritability, memory impairment, mild liver in regenerating fortified foods or supplements. During pregnancy, it is depression, hallucination, breathlessness (dyspnea) on blood in anemic dogs.
recommended that women consume 2.6 μg/day and up to 2.8
exertion, tingling and numbness (paraesthesia). Vitamin B12 Minot and Murphy
μg/day during breastfeeding to cover the additional deficiency can also lead to hyperhomocysteinemia, a possible report that a diet rich in requirements of the fetus/infant. The Committee on Nutrition 1926 large quantities of raw risk factor for occlusive vascular disease. Low vitamin B12 has of the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends a daily liver restores the been associated with a variety of chronic diseases of aging vitamin B12 intake of 0.15 μg/100 kcal energy intake for infants normal level of red such as dementia and cognitive impairment, cardiovascular and preadolescent children. Other authorities have suggested Castle postulates that blood cells in patients disease (CVD) and osteoporosis. intakes of 0.4 - 0.5 m μg (0 - 1 year of age), 0.9 - 1.8 μg (1 - 10 two factors are involved with pernicious anemia.
in the control of 1929 Liver concentrates are
The symptoms of vitamin B12 deficiency are similar to those years of age) and 2.4 μg (>10 years). The 'average' Western diet pernicious anemia: an developed and studies of folic acid deficiency, the major difference being only that probably supplies 3 - 15 μg/day, but this can range from 'extrinsic factor' in food on the presumed vitamin B12 deficiency is associated with spinal cord Pernicious anemia: 1 - 100 μg/day. and an 'intrinsic factor' active principle(s) degeneration. If folic acid is used to treat vitamin B12 in normal gastric ('antipernicious anemia deficiency, anemia may be alleviated but the risk of damage Pernicious anemia is the classical symptom of B12 Safety secretion. Simultaneous factor') are initiated.
administration of these to the nervous system remains. Nervous dysfunction deficiency, but it is actually the end stage of an
Large intakes of vitamin B12 from food or supplements have factors causes red associated with vitamin B12 can be irreversible and potentially autoimmune inflammation of the stomach, resulting in caused no toxicity in healthy people. No adverse effects have blood cell formation life threatening if left untreated. It is therefore essential to destruction of stomach cells by the body's own been reported from single oral doses as high as 100 mg and which alleviates Whipple, Minot and diagnose the deficiency accurately before starting therapy. antibodies. Anemia is a condition in which red blood pernicious anemia. Murphy are awarded chronic administration of 1 mg (500 times the RDI) weekly for cells do not provide adequate oxygen to body tissues. 1934 the Nobel Prize for
Deficiency is usually caused as a result of vitamin B12 up to 5 years. Moreover, there have been no reports of
Pernicious anemia is a type of megaloblastic anemia. Medicine for their work malabsorption. Without intrinsic factor, absorption is not carcinogenic or mutagenic properties, and studies to date in the treatment possible and a severe and persistent deficiency develops Gastric atrophy: indicate no teratogenic potential. The main food safety of pernicious anemia.
Rickes, Smith and that cannot be prevented by the usual dietary intakes of authorities have not set a UL for vitamin B12 because of its Parker, working vitamin B12. Gastric atrophy is a chronic inflammation of the stomach low toxicity. separately, isolate a 1948
resulting in decreased stomach acid production. As this crystalline red pigment
Groups at risk is necessary for the release of vitamin B12 from the Supplements and food fortification which they name
- Vegetarians proteins in food, vitamin B12 absorption is reduced. vitamin B12. West shows that
The principal form of vitamin B12 used in supplements is injections of vitamin

- The elderly cyanocobalamin. It is available in the form of injections and as B12 dramatically benefit a nasal gel for the treatment of pernicious anemia. patients with
- Alcoholics pernicious anemia.
Cyanocobalamin is also available in tablet and oral liquid form
- People with: Reducing disease risk: therapeutic use for vitamin B-complex, multivitamin and vitamin B12 Pierce and team isolate two crystalline forms
- p ernicious anemia (autoimmune disease, chiefly affects Pernicious anemia supplements. Vitamin B12 is widely used to enrich cereals and of vitamin B12 that are 1949
people post middle age) certain beverages. Fortification with vitamin B12 is especially equally effective in
- f ood-bound vitamin B12 malabsorption (in patients Pernicious anemia patients are traditionally treated with important for products aimed at people with a low dietary combating pernicious receiving long-term treatment with certain drugs, elderly intramuscular injections of vitamin B12; large oral doses of the vitamin B12 intake, such as vegans. anemia. One form is Hodgkin and colleagues patients with gastric atrophy, patients with atrophic vitamin are also effective but require lifetime therapy. When found to contain cyanide establish the gastritis) used alone, oral doses of at least 150 μg/day are necessary, Production (cyanocobalamin), 1955 molecular structure of while the other is not cyanocobalamin and its
- after gastrectomy although single weekly oral doses of 1,000 μg have proved Vitamin B12 is produced commercially from bacterial (hydroxocobalamin). coenzyme forms using
- a fter ingestion of corrosive agents with destruction of satisfactory in some cases.
fermentation, usually as cyanocobalamin. Eschenmoser and X-ray crystallography.
gastric mucosa colleagues in
- l esions of the small bowel; bacterial overgrowth; patients Hyperhomocysteinemia Switzerland and 1955
with small intestinal defects; inborn errors of cobalamin Homocysteine appears to be a nerve and vessel toxin, Woodward and team metabolism etc. promoting mortality and CVD as well as stroke, Alzheimer's in the US synthesize
- pancreatic insufficiency disease, birth defects, recurrent pregnancy loss, and eye vitamin B12 from Total chemical
- AIDS disorders. Keeping homocysteine at levels associated with cultures of certain synthesis of vitamin B12
bacteria/fungi. 1973 by Woodward.
lower rates of disease requires adequate vitamin B12, folic acid and vitamin B6 intake.
102 103
Glossary
AMDR is the percentage range of protein, fat and carbohydrate A unit of measurement for the amount of a substance (e.g.
Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Range (AMDR) intakes that is associated with a reduced risk of chronic disease, International Unit (IU) vitamin), based on measured biological activity or effect.
while also providing adequate intakes of essential nutrients.
A dietary style based on food patterns typical of Mediterranean
Only established when an EAR (and thus an RDI) cannot be Mediterranean diet countries: plant foods, fruit, olive oil, dairy products (principally
Adequate Intake (AI) determined because the data are not clear-cut enough; a cheese and yogurt), fish and poultry consumed in low to nutrient has either an RDI or an AI. The AI is a value based moderate amounts and red meat consumed in low amounts.
on experimentally derived intake levels or approximations Overall, the Mediterranean diet consists of a healthier balance of observed mean nutrient intakes by a group (or groups) of between (higher) omega-3 and (lower) omega-6 fatty acids healthy people. The AIs for children and adults are expected (compared to the Western diet). Research has shown that to meet or exceed the amount needed to maintain a defined people who follow this diet are less likely to develop CVD.
nutritional state or criterion of adequacy in essentially all members of a specific apparently healthy population.
A disease occurring among adults that is characterized by
Osteomalacia softening of the bones due to loss of bone mineral.
Antioxidant substances, such as vitamins and carotenoids, Osteomalacia is characteristic of vitamin D deficiency in adults,
Antioxidant are thought to protect the body against the destructive while children with vitamin D deficiency suffer from soft and effects of free radicals. Antioxidants neutralize free radicals deformed bones (rickets). Many of the effects of the disease by donating one of their own electrons, ending the electron- overlap with the more common osteoporosis, but the two
"stealing" reaction. They act as scavengers, helping to prevent diseases are significantly different. Osteomalacia is specifically cell and tissue damage that could lead to CVD and cancer. a defect in mineralization of the protein (collagen) framework.
Oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is important in the development of fatty build-ups in the arteries
(atherosclerosis). Antioxidant substances, such as vitamins A disease caused by having too little vitamin B3 (niacin) or the and carotenoids, can potentially prevent LDL oxidation and its Pellagra amino acid tryptophan in the diet. It can also occur if the body harmful effects. fails to absorb these nutrients, after gastrointestinal diseases or with alcoholism. Symptoms of pellagra include diarrhea, mental confusion, and scaly skin sores.
Any class of mainly yellow, orange, or red fat-soluble pigments
Carotenoids produced by plants and algae, as well as several bacteria and fungi. Dietary carotenoids act as a type of antioxidant The PRI, in most countries called RDI, defines an adequate for humans and provide overall health benefits, including Population Reference Intake (PRI) nutrient intake level that most, if not all, individuals of a decreased risk of disease and enhanced immunity. population or a specific population group should obtain to satisfy their requirements. PRIs were set by the European
Scientific Committee on Food (SCF).
DRI is an umbrella term for a set of nutrient reference values
Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) that includes the estimated average requirements (EAR), the recommended daily intake (RDI), the adequate intake (AI) and A clinical trial with at least one active treatment group (e.g.
the acceptable macronutrient distribution range (AMDR). These Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) taking a vitamin) and a control (e.g. placebo) group. In blind values guide professionals on the amount of a nutrient needed RCTs, participants are chosen for the experimental and control to maintain health in an otherwise healthy individual or group groups (e.g. placebo-controlled) at random and are not told of people. DRIs also include the tolerable upper intake level whether they are receiving the active or placebo treatment
(UL), which is the maximum amount of a nutrient that can be until the end of the study. An RCT in which neither the consumed safely over a long period of time. investigators administering the treatment, nor the participants know which participants, are receiving the experimental treatment and which are receiving the placebo is called
The amount of a nutrient that is estimated to meet the 'double blind'. RCTs are always prospective studies i.e. a study
Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) requirement of half of all healthy individuals in a given age that follows participants for a period of time and is observing and gender group. This value is based on a thorough review of an outcome, such as the development of a disease. RCTs, the the scientific literature. gold standard for intervention studies, are considered to be of high quality because the risk of bias is minimized when the trial is blinded. An RCT can provide evidence and can establish cause-and-effect relationships (hypothesis testing).
104 105
A softening of bones in children potentially leading to REFERENCES
Rickets fractures and deformity. Rickets is among the most common childhood diseases in many developing countries. The 1. The Institute of Medicine, www.iom.edu 6. WHO Dietary recommendations / 11. The Nobel Prize and the Discovery of predominant cause is a vitamin D deficiency, but lack of 2. The Linus Pauling Institute, Micronutrient Nutritional requirements Vitamins. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Media adequate calcium may also lead to rickets. Information Center, AB 2020. Mon. 4 May 2020. oregonstate.edu/mic nutrecomm/en/ nobelprize.org/prizes/uncategorized/
3. John W. Erdman Jr. PhD, Ian A. Macdonald 7. Souci Fachmann Kraut, Food Composition the-nobel-prize-and-the-discovery-ofPhD, Steven H. Zeisel MD, PhD (eds.), and Nutrition Tables, 8th edition, 2016. vitamins
RDI refers to the average daily dietary intake of a nutrient that Present Knowledge in Nutrition, ILSI, 10t 8. Vitamin and mineral requirements 12. Gerald F. Combs, Jr. James P. McClung,
Recommended Daily Intake (RDI) edition, 2012. in human nutrition, World Health The Vitamins: Fundamental Aspects in is sufficient to meet the nutritional requirements of 97 - 98% of Organization and Food and Agriculture Nutrition and Health, Academic Press, 5th
4. Expert Group on Vitamins and Minerals.
a population. Organization of the United Nations, 2nd edition, 2017.
Safe upper levels for vitamins and minerals, Food Standards Agency, United edition, 2004. 13. Michael J. Gibney, Susan A. LanhamKingdom, 2003. 9. Tolerable upper intake levels for vitamins New, Aedin Cassidy, Hester H. Vorster, sites/default/files/vitmin2003.pdf and minerals, EFSA, 2006. Introduction to Human Nutrition, WileyA disorder caused by lack of vitamin C. Symptoms include efsa.europa.eu/en/ndatopics/docs/ Blackwell, 2nd edition, 2009.
5. DACH Deutsche Gesellschaft für Ernährung
Scurvy anemia, bleeding gums, tooth loss, joint pain, and fatigue. ndatolerableuil.pdf
(DGE), Österreichische Gesellschaft
Scurvy is treated by supplying foods high in vitamin C and für Ernährung (ÖGE), Schweizerische 10. Handbook of Vitamins, J. Zempleni, CRC The complete list of references is available vitamin C supplements. Gesellschaft für Ernährung (SGE), Press, 5th edition, 2013. on request info.nutritionscience@dsm.com.
Schweizerische Vereinigung für
Ernährung (SVE): Referenzwerte für die
Nährstoffzufuhr. 2. Auflage, 5. aktualisierte
A daily average intake from food and beverages for certain Ausgabe 2019.
Suggested Dietary Target (SDT) nutrients that may help in the prevention of chronic disease.
SDT (intake per day on average) for vitamin C is 220 mg in men and 190 mg in women. This is equivalent to the 90th centile of INDEX intake in the Australian and New Zealand populations, to be attained by replacing nutrient-poor, energy-dense foods and drinks with plenty of vegetables, legumes and fruit. Vitamin A page Molecular formula 21 Carrots 26, 28, 31
Muscles 21 Chemistry 26
β-Carotene 23, 25
Opsin 23 Color 26, 30
Absorption and body stores 24
Oxidation 24 Deficiency 29
Tolerable UL is the highest continuing daily intake of a nutrient Alcohol 21, 24
Pathogens 23 Groups at risk 29
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) that is likely to pose no risks of adverse health effects for Blindness 22, 24, 25 Pregnancy 23, 25 Dietary sources 28
Blood 23, 24
almost all individuals. However, as intake increases above the Provitamin A 22, 23, 24 Therapeutic use 29
Bone 25
UL, the risk of adverse effects increases. RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 23, 25 Enzymes 28, 29
Carotenes 25
Reproduction 23 Erythropoietic protoporphyria 29, 30
Carotenoids 22, 23, 24, 25
Respiratory disease 24 FAO/WHO Expert Committee on
Chemistry 21
Retinal 21, 23, 25 Food Additives 28, 31
A dietary habit chosen by many people in developed countries, Deficiency 22, 24, 25
Retinol 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 Free radicals 28
Western diet and increasingly in developing countries. High intakes of Groups at risk 24 Retinylester 24, 25 Functions 26, 27, 28
Diarrhea 24
red meat, sugar, fat, salt, and refined grains characterize it. Retinoic acid 21, 23, 24, 25 History 31
Dietary sources 23
Research has shown that people who eat lots of foods in the Rhodopsin 23 Hypervitaminosis A 30
Differentiation 21, 23
Western category have a 35% higher heart attack risk than Safety 25 Immune system 29
Therapeutic use 24
Spinal cord (and vertebrae) 23 Interactions 29
those who ate less meat, eggs, and fried and salty foods DNA 23
Stability 24 Intestine 28, 29
(see Mediterranean diet). In addition, chronic illnesses and Ears 23
Symptoms 22, 24, 25 Lipids 28
health problems such as obesity, atherosclerosis, high blood Epithelial cells 23 Synonyms 21 Measurement 28
Eyes (and optic nerve) 23
pressure, high cholesterol, and cancer are thought to be either UNICEF 25 Molecular formula 26, 31
Fat-soluble 22, 24
wholly or partially related to a Western diet. Vegans 24 Monooxygenase 28
Fat-soluble A 25
Water-soluble B 25 Oxygen 29
Fish liver oil 25
World Health Organization (WHO) 24, 25 Provitamin A 26, 29, 31
Functions 21, 22, 23, 24
Xerophthalmia 24, 25 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 30
Growth and development 21, 22, 23
Retinol 28, 29, 30
Heart 23
β-Carotene page Safety 30
History 25
Skin 28, 29, 30
Hormone 23, 24 Absorption and body stores 28
Stability 29
Hypervitaminosis A 25 Alcoholics 29
Supplements and food fortification 30
Immune function 23 Antioxidant 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
Terpenoids 26
Industrial synthesis 25 Bioavailablity 28
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (The) 30
Institute of Medicine (The) 23, 25 Blood 29, 31
U.S. Food Chemicals Codex (The) 31
Interactions 24 British Expert Committee on Vitamins
U.S. National Cancer Institute (The) 31
Intestinal mucosal 24 and Minerals (The) 30
Vegans 29
Light 23, 24 Cancer 28, 30, 31
Vision 28
Measurement 23, 24 Carotene 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
Vitamin A 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
Metabolite 23, 24 Carotenodermia 30
World Health Organization (The) 31
Milk 21, 24, 25 Carotenoids 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
Xanthophylls 31
106 107
Vitamin D page Anti-inflammatory 42 Cancer 48 Groups at risk 53 Iron 61 lactochrome 67
Antioxidant 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 Carboxylation 46, 49 Dehydro-L-ascorbic acid 50 Keto acids 58 Light 63, 65, 66
1,25-dihydroxy-cholecalciferol 34
Atherosclerosis 41 Chemistry 44 Dietary sources 52 Kidneys 58 Measurement 64, 67
7-dehydrocholesterol 36
Blood 40, 41 Chromatography 46 Therapeutic use 53 Magnesium 58 Migraine 66
25-hydroxycholecalciferol 34
Cancer 41 Deficiency 45, 46, 47, 48 Eye health 50 Measurement 58 Molecular formula 62
Absorption and body stores 34
Cardiovascular diseases 41 Groups at risk 47 Fat-soluble 52 Molecular formula 56 Mucosa 65
Adipose tissue 34
Cell function 38 Dietary sources 46 Fatigue 53 Muscles 56, 58, 59 Nails (fingers and toes) 62
Antirachitic 32, 37
Chemistry 38 Therapeutic use 48 Free radicals 52 Nerves (incl. neurotransmitters ) 56, 58, 59 Niacin 64
Blood 32, 37
Cholesterol 40 Extrahepatic tissues 46 US Food and Nutrition Board (The) 54 Niacin 61 Pregnancy 65, 67
Bone 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37
Chromatography 40 Fat-soluble vitamin 45, 46, 49 Functions 50, 51, 52, 53 Nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) 56, 57, 58 Pyridoxine 62, 64
Calciferol 34
Chylomicrons 40 Food and Nutrition Board 48 History 55 Pentose phosphate pathway 58 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 66, 67
Calcitriol 34, 36, 37
Deficiency 39, 41, 43 Functions 44, 46 Immune stimulation 50 Phosphorylated 56, 58 Redox reactions 64
Calcium 32, 33, 34, 35, 36
Groups at risk 41 History 49 Industrial production 54, 55 Pregnancy 60, 61 Respiratory chain 64
Cancer 35, 37
Dietary sources 40 Hemolytic anaemia 48 Institute of Medicine (The) 54 Pyrimidine 56 Retinal tissue 64
Cells 37
Therapeutic use 41 Ileum 46 Interactions 53 Pyruvate dehydrogenase 58 Reproduction 62
Chemistry 32
EC Scientific Committee on Foods (The) 42 Institute of Medicine (The) 48, 49 Iron absorption 50 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 60, 61 Riboflavin-5'-phosphate (E 106) 66
Cholecalciferol 32, 34, 36
Fat-soluble 38 Interactions 46 Lead (reduction) 55 Riboflavin 61 Safety 66
Cod liver oil 37
Food and Nutrition Board (The) 43 Jaundice 48 Measurement 52 Safety 60 Skin 62, 64, 65
Contraceptives (oral) 35
Free radicals 40, 43 Kernicterus 48 Molecular formula 50 Stability 58 Stability 65
Cyclopentanoperhydro-phenanthrene 32
Functions 38, 40, 43 Coagulation 44, 46, 49 Muscles 52 Supplements and food fortification 61 Supplements and food fortification 66
Deficiency 33, 35
History 43 Malabsorption syndromes 49 National Cancer Institute (USA) (The) 55 Symptoms 59, 61 Symptoms 65, 66
Groups at risk 35
Institute of Medicine (The) 42 Matrix Gla-protein (MGP) 46 Nobel prize 55 Synonyms 56 Synonyms 62
Dietary sources 34
Interactions 41 Measurement 46 Pregnancy 54 Thiamine diphosphate (TDP) 56 Tryptophan 64
Therapeutic use 35
Intestine 40 Menaquinones 44, 46 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 54 Thiamine monophosphate (TMP) 56 Urine 64, 66
Ergocalciferol 32, 36
Iron 41 Molecular formula 44 Safety 53, 54 Thiamine triphosphate (TTP) 56 US National Council 66
Fat-soluble 33
isophytol 42 Newborn infants 47, 48 Scurvy 53, 55 Thiazole moiety 56 Water-soluble 63, 66, 67
Food and Nutrition Board (The) 36
Lipids 40, 41, 43 Nobel prize 49 Smoking 53 Transketolase 58 Xanthine oxidase 64
Functions 32, 34
Low density lipoprotein (LDL) 40, 41, 43 Osteocalcin 46 Stability 52 Vitamins C 58
Harvard School of Public Health 37
Lymphatic system 40 Osteoporosis 45, 48 Stress 52, 53, 54 Vitamins E 58 Vitamin B3 (Niacin) page
Hip fracture 35, 37
Malabsorption syndromes 41 Phylloquinone 44, 46, 48 Supplements and food fortification 54 Water-soluble 57, 61
History 37 3-cyanopyridine 72
Molecular formula 38 Pregnancy 49 Symptoms 53, 55 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome 59
Immune function 37 3-methylpyridine 72
Measurement 40 Prothrombin 46, 48, 49 Synonyms 50
Interactions 35 5-ethyl-2-methylpyridine 72
Muscles 40 Proteins (C, S, Z) 46 Teeth and gums 52 Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) page
Intestine 34, 35, 36 Absorption and body stores 70
Myopathy 41 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 48, 49 Uses in food technology 54
Insulin 34, 35, 36 7,8-dimethyl-10-(1-D-ribityl)isoalloxazin 62 Adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribose 70, 71
Neurological symptoms 41 Safety 48 Vitamin E 50, 52, 53, 55
Kidney 34, 36, 37 Absorption and body stores 64, 65, 66 ADP-ribosylation 73
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) 40, 41 Stability 46 Water-soluble 51, 52
Leukocytes 37 Antioxidant 62, 64, 66 AIDS 71
Pregnancy 42 Supplements and food fortification 49 Wound healing 50, 51, 53, 55
Malabsorption syndromes 35 Blood 64, 65, 66 Anticonvulsants 70
Prophylactic role 41 Symptoms 47 Zinc 52
Molecular formula 32 B-complex vitamin 65 Antioxidant 71
RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 42 Synonyms 44
Measurement 34 Cardiovascular disease 66 Black tongue disease (in dogs) 73
Retinopathy (pigmented) 41 US Food and Nutrition Board of the Vitamin B1 (Thiamine) page
Muscles 33, 34 Chemistry 62 Blood 70, 71, 72
Safety 42 Institute of Medicine (The) 48
Nerves 34 Absorption and body stores 58 Coenzymes 62, 64, 65, 67 Cancer (mouth, throat and oesophagus) 71
Selenium 41 Vitamin C 48
Osteomalacia 35, 37 Alcohol 58, 60 Color 64, 66 Cardiovascular disease 71
Stability 40
Osteoporosis 33, 35 Beriberi disease 57, 59, 60, 61 Crystalline riboflavin (E101) 66 Chemistry 68
Supplements and food fortification 42 Vitamin C page
Parathyroid hormone 34, 35 Blood 58 Deficiency 64, 65, 66, 67 Cholesterol 69, 70, 71, 73
Symptoms 39, 41
Phosphorus 34, 35 2,3-endiol-L-gulonic acid-γ-lactone 50 Brain 58 Diarrhea 66 Coenzymes (NAD and NADP) 68, 70
Synonyms 38
Pregnancy 36 3-oxo-L-gulonic acid-γ-lactone 50 British Medical Research Council (The) 61 Groups at risk 65 Copper (deficiency) 70
Tocopherols 38
Psoriasis 35 Absorption and body stores 52 Cancer 59, 60 Dietary sources 64 Deficiency 70, 71, 73
α-tocopherol 38, 40, 41, 42, 43
RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 36 Alcohol 53 Chemistry 56 Therapeutic use 66 Glucose 72
β-tocopherol 38
Rickets 33, 35, 36, 37 Anti-allergic 50 Coenzyme 58 Erythrocytes 64, 67 Groups at risk 71
γ-tocopherol 38
Safety 36 Antioxidant 50, 52, 53, 54, 55 Deficiency 57, 58, 59, 60, 61 Erythrocyte glutathione reductase test 67 Dermatitis 71
δ-tocopherol 38
Seco-steroid 32 Ascorbic acid 50, 51, 52, 54, 55 Diarrhea 60 Eyes 64, 65, 66 Diabetes 71
RRR-α-tocopherol 40, 42
Symptoms 35, 36 B-complex vitamins 53 Groups at risk 59 Flavin 62, 64, 65, 67 Diarrhea 71, 72
all-rac-α-tocopherol 42
Stability 34 Bioflavonoids 53 Dietary sources 58 Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) 62, 67 Dietary sources 70
Tocotrienols 38
Steroids 32 Blood 51, 52, 53, 54 Therapeutic use 60 Flavin mononucleotide (FMN) 62, 67 Therapeutic use 71
Trimethylhydroquinone 42
Sunlight 33, 36, 37 Bone 51, 52, 53 Enzymes 58 Flavoprotein 64, 65 DNA 69, 70, 71
US National Research Council (The) 43
Supplements and food fortification 36 Cardiovascular disease (CVD) 52 Erythrocyte transketolase (α-ETK) 58 Fluorescent 67 EU Scientific Committee on Food 72
Vitamin C 41, 42
Synonyms 32 Cancer 52, 55 Food and Nutrition Board (The) 61 Folic acid 62, 64 Fatty acid(s) 69, 70
Ultraviolet (light and irradiation) 36, 37 Chemistry 50 Functions 56, 58 Food and Nutrition Board 66 Food and Nutrition Board (The) 72
Vitamin K page
Vegans 35 Cholesterol 52, 53 Gastrointestinal 58, 59 Free radicals 63 Functions 68, 70
Vitamin D receptor (VDR) 34, 37 2-methyl-1,4-naphthoquinones 44 Citrus fruits 52 Heart 58, 59 Functions 62, 64 Glossitis 71
γ-carboxylation 46 Collagen 50, 52 High Performance Liquid Glutathione reductase 64, 66, 67 Hartnup's disease 71
Vitamin E page γ-carboxylglutamate 46 Color 54 Chromatography 58 Hair 62 Hepatotoxicity 72
Absorption and body stores 46 Common cold 52, 55 History 60, 61 History 67 History 73
β-Carotene 41
Atherosclerosis 48 Deficiency 53, 54 Institute of Medicine (The) 61 Interactions 65 Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 71
Absorption and body stores 40
Blood (incl. clotting) 44, 45, 46, 47, 49 Diarrhea 54 Interactions 58 Intestines 64 Interactions 70
Adipose tissue 40
Bone 44, 45, 46, 48 Glucose 54 Intestine (small) 58 Institute of Medicine 67 Intestine 70
108 109
Institute of Medicine 72 Kinase 76 Homocysteine 80, 84 Hair 86, 88, 89, 91 Molecular formula 92 Institute of Medicine (The) 101, 103
Iron 70 L-carnitine 76, 77 Hydrochloric acid (in the stomach) 82 History 91 Mono-glutamate 94 Interactions 101
Isoniazid 70 L-pantothenic acid 77 Hyperemesis gravidarum 84 Hydrolysis 88 Measurement 94 Intestine 100
Jaundice 72 Lactobacillus plantarum 76 Hyperhomocystinaemia 84 Industrial production 91 Megaloblastic anaemia 95, 97 Lipid 100
Lipoprotein cholesterol 71 Lipids 74, 76 Glucose 81, 84 Infantile seborrhea 89 Metabolism 92, 94, 95 Measurement 101
'Mal de la rosa' 73 Molecular formula 74 Immune system 81, 82, 84 Institute of Medicine 89 Methionine 94 Melatonin 98
Molecular formula 68 Measurement 76 Interactions 83 Interactions 89 Methyltetrahydrofolate 94 Metabolism 98, 100, 101, 102
Measurement 70 Metabolism 74, 76, 77, 79 Intestine 82 Intestine 88 Neural tube defects 93, 96, 97 Methionine synthase 100
N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide 70 Neurotransmitters 74, 75, 76 Institute of Medicine 83 Leiner's disease 89, 90 Norite-eluate Factor 97 Methylcobalamin 98, 100
N-methyl-nicotinamide 70 Nobel Prize 79 Kidney stones 84 Lipids 86, 88 Nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) 94 Methylmalonyl Coenzyme A mutase 100
Nausea 72 Omega-methyl pantothenic acid 77, 79 Magnesium 83 Measurement 88 P-aminobenzoic acid 92 Microbial synthesis (in animals) 100
Neurological Symptoms 71 Pantetheine 74, 76 Measurement 82 Metabolism 86, 88, 89, 91 Plasma homocysteine 94 Molecular formula 98
Nicotinamide 68, 70, 71, 72, 73 Pantothenate 74, 76, 77, 79 Metabolism 81, 83, 84 Molecular formula 86 Polyglutamate 94 Nervous tissue (incl. neurological) 98
Pellagra 68, 71, 73 Protein acetylation 76 Molecular formula 80 Nails (finger and toe) 86, 89 Pregnancy 92, 93, 95, 96, 97 Nitrogens 98
Penicillamine 70 Porphyrin 74, 76 Niacin 80, 82, 83 Pantothenic acid 89 Pteroylpolyglutamic acid 92 Nobel prize 103
Pregnancy 72 Postoperative ileus 78 Pellagra-preventive factor 85 Pregnancy 89 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 96, 97 Osteoporosis 102
RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 72 Pregnancy 77 Pregnancy 83, 84 Proteins 87, 88 Safety 96 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 101, 103
Riboflavin 70, 71 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 77, 78 PMS (premenstrual syndrome) 84 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 89 Spina bifida 97 Pernicious anaemia 98, 100, 102, 103
Safety 72 Safety 78 Pyridoxalphosphate (PLP) 80, 82, 83 Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sprue 95 Phagocytosis 100
Stability 70 Skin (incl. wounds) 75, 77, 78 'Rat-pellagra' 85 (Brewer's Yeast) 86, 90 Stability 95 Pregnancy 101, 102, 103
Stomach 70 Stability 76 RDI (Recommended Daily Intake) 83, 84, 85 Safety 90 Streptococcus lactis 97 Ribonucleotide reduction 100
Supplements and food fortification 72 Steroids 74, 76 Riboflavin 82, 83, 85 Seborrheic dermatitis 89, 90 Supplements and food fortification 96 Safety 103
Symptoms 71 Supplements and food fortification 79 Safety 85 Stability 88 Symptoms 95, 97 Stability 101
Synonyms 68 Symptoms 75, 77, 79 Serotonin 82 Structure 86, 91 Synonyms 92 Succinyl coenzyme A 101
Triacylglycerols 71 Synonyms 74 Sideroblastic anaemias 84 Supplements and food fortification 90 US Food and Nutrition Board 96 Supplements and food fortification 103
Tryptophan 70, 71, 72, 73 Triglyceride 76, 79 Stability 83 Symptoms 89 US Public Health Service 97 Synonyms 98
Tuberculosis (TB) 70 Vitamin A 77 Supplements and food fortification 85 Synonyms 86 Vitamin BC 97 Vegans 100, 103
Vitamin B6 70, 71 Vitamin B5 74, 75, 76, 78 Symptoms 84 Vitamin H 86, 91 Vitamin B9 92, 93 Vitamin B6 101, 102
Water-soluble 69 Vitamin B12 77 Synonyms 80 Water-soluble 88 Vitamin B12 94, 95, 96
Yeast 70, 73 Vitamin C 77 Trytophan (incl. load test) 82, 83 Vitamin C 95
Water-soluble 75, 79 Water-soluble 82 Vitamin B9 (Folic Acid) page
Vitamin B5 ( Pantothenic acid) page Yeast 74, 76, 79 Xanthurenic acid 83 Vitamin B12 (Cyanocobalamin) page
5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF) 94
Zinc 82, 83
β-alanine 74, 79 Absorption and body stores 94 1-methylmalonyl CoA 100
Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxin) page
β-mercaptoethylamine 74 Alcohol 95 5-deoxyadenosylcobalamin 98
Vitamin B7 (Biotin) page
β-oxidation 76, 77 2-hydroxy 80 Antibiotics 94 Absorption and body stores 100
2,4-dihydroxy-3,3-dimethyIbutyric acid 74 2-methylpyrimidine 80 AI (Adequate Intake) 89 Aspirin 95 Adenosylcobalamin 100
Absorption and body stores 76, 77 4-pyridoxic acid 82 Antibiotics 89 B-vitamin(s) 95 Alcohol 101
Acetylation 76 Absorption and body stores 82 Alcohol 89 Bioavailability 94, 96 Anticonvulsants 101
Acyl carrier protein (ACP) 76, 79 Adermin 85 Avidin 88, 89 Blood cells 93, 94, 95 Antipernicious anaemia factor 103
Alcohol 76, 77, 79 Alkalis 83 3-hydroisovaleric acid 88 Bone marrow 92, 95 Blood 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103
Alzheimer's disease 77 Alcohol 80 Absorption and body stores 88 Celiac disease 95 Bone marrow 98
Ascorbic acid 77, 78 Aldehyde pyridoxal 80 Baby 90 Cancer 95, 97 Cancer 103
Biotin 76, 77, 78 Amine pyridoxamine 80 Biotinidase 89, 90, 91 Chemistry 92 Cardiovascular disease 102
Blood 74, 76 Asthma 84 Brewer's yeast Cholesterol 95 Chemistry 98
'Burning feet' syndrome 75 Autism 84 (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) 86, 90 Citrovorum factor 96 Cobalt (Co) 98
Calcium pantothenate 76, 79 Biotin 83 Blood 88 Contraceptives (oral) 95 Cobalamin 98, 101, 102
Chemistry 74 Blood 80, 81, 82, 84 β-methylcrotonyl-CoA 88 Crohn's disease 95 Coenzyme A 101
Cholesterol 76, 79 Brain (incl. function) 82 Acetyl-CoA 66 Holocarboxylase Chromatography 94 Crystallography 103
Chromatography 76 Cardiovascular disease 84 synthetase 88 Deficiency 94, 95, 96, 97 Cyanocobalamin 98, 99, 101, 103
Coenzyme A 76 Carpal tunnel syndrome 84 Propionyl-CoA 88 Dietary sources 94 Deficiency 100, 101, 102, 103
Coenyzme Q10 76, 77 Chemistry 80 Pyruvate 88, 89 Dihydrofolate 95, 96 Groups at risk 102
Color 77, 79 Coenzyme 82, 83 Chemistry 86 Therapeutic use 96 Symptoms 102, 103
D-panthenol 74, 77, 78, 79 Chromatography 82 Coenzyme R 91 Folate(s) 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97 Depression 102
Diarrhea 78 Cysteine 80 D-biotin 90 Folinic acid 92, 96 Dietary sources 100
Deficiency 76, 77, 78, 79 Deficiency 82, 83, 84, 85 Deficiency 89, 90, 91 Functions 94 Dimethylbenzimidazole 98
Groups at risk 77 Groups at risk 83 Food and Nutrition Board 89 Glutamic acid 92 Therapeutic use 102
Dietary sources 76 Depression 84 Groups at risk 89 History 97 Folic acid (folate) 98, 100, 102, 103
Therapeutic use 78 Diabetes 84 Glycoprotein 89 Homocysteine 92, 94, 95 Functions 98, 100
Eyes 75 Dietary sources 82 Glucose 86, 87, 88 Human papillomavirus 97 Gastric atrophy 102
Fatigue 74, 77, 78 Therapeutic use 84 Diabetes 89 Ibuprofen 95 Glycoprotein 100
Fatty acid(s) 75, 76, 77 Erythrocyte alanine aminotransferase Dietary sources 88 Interactions 95 History 103
Functions 74, 76 activation coefficient (EAST-AC) 82 Therapeutic use 89 Intestine 94, 95 Homocysteine 100, 101, 102
History 79 Fat-soluble vitamins 82 DNA replication 88 Iron 96 Hydrochloric acid (in the stomach) 100
Homopantothenate 77 Functions 80, 82, 83 Egg white 89, 91 L. casei 97 Hydroxycobalamin 98
Hypervitaminosis 78 Histamine 82 Fatty acids 86, 88 Lactobacillus casei 94, 97 Hyperhomocysteinemia 102
Interactions 77 History 85 Functions 88 Leucovorin 96 Ileum 100
110 111
Vitamin Basics 2020
To find out more about our vitamins and
DSM's full portfolio of offerings, please visit www.dsm-vitamins.com or contact us.
5th Edition, 2020
This publication does not constitute or provide scientific or medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. This information is based on DSM's current knowledge.
DSM makes no representation or warranty of the accuracy, reliability, or completeness of the information and as to results to be obtained. Use of this information shall be at your discretion and risk. It does not relieve you of your obligation to comply with all applicable laws and regulations and to observe all third-party rights. The content of this document is subject to change without further notice.