Ramadan and Diabetes
Guide to a safe fast
Before deciding to fast, please read this guide and consult your doctor or diabetes management team
The month of Ramadhan [is that] in which was revealed the Qur'an, a guidance for the people and clear proofs of guidance and criterion. So whoever sights [the new moon of] the month, let him fast it; and whoever is ill or on a journey - then an equal number of other days. Allah intends for you ease and does not intend for you hardship and
[wants] for you to complete the period and to glorify Allah for that [to] which He has guided you; and perhaps you will be grateful.
Chapter (2) sūrat l-baqarah (The Cow), Verse (2:185)
Know your potential risk while fasting
Low blood sugar High blood sugar
(Hypoglycaemia) (Hyperglycaemia)
Sweating, Fast pulse, Irritability, Extreme Increased Headache shaking heart rate anxiety tiredness thirst
Dizziness Tingling of Fatigue Blurred Fruity-scented Going to the the lips vision breath toilet more often
Dehydration Diabetic Ketoacidosis
◆ Increased thirst ◆ Fruity-scented breath
◆ Not going to the toilet as often ◆ Dryness of mouth
◆ Dry mouth, lips and skin ◆ Excessive thirst
Understand your risk category

CATEGORY 1 CATEGORY 2 CATEGORY 3

Very High Risk High Risk Moderate/Low Risk
Decision to use license not to fast based on discretion
MUST NOT FAST SHOULD NOT FAST of medical opinion and your ability to tolerate fast.
If you have one or more If you have one or more If you have wellof the following: of the following: controlled type 2
diabetes treated with
- Severe and repeated low - Poorly controlled type 2
one or more of the blood glucose events three diabetes months before Ramadan - Type 1 or type 2 diabetes following:
- Diabetic ketoacidosis treated with single or
- Kidney problems multiple insulin injections - Lifestyle therapy
- Poorly controlled type 1 - Pregnancy - Tablets and injectable diabetes - Kidney problems, other medicines such as insulin
- Acute illness complications of diabetes
- Pregnancy or other diseases
- Heart problems - A physically demanding
- Old age with ill health occupation
- Treatment with drugs that may affect mental function
Whichever category you fall under, consult your doctor before deciding to fast.
Consult your doctor before fasting
Treatment plan
◆ Check if you need to adjust the timing, dose or type of your medication
Diet modification
◆ Divide daily calories between Suhoor and Iftar + 1-2 snacks
◆ Consume high-fibre foods
◆ Eat plenty of fruits, vegetables and salads
◆ Drink fluids between sunset and sunrise
Avoid in excess
◆ Caffeinated drinks
◆ Sweetened drinks
◆ Sugary desserts
Importance of Blood Glucose monitoring
Changes in eating habits during Ramadan may affect your blood glucose levels and therefore it is important to check them frequently.
Midday / Noon
12h00
When to test?

pm 1. Pre-dawn meal (suhoor)
Su M ho o o r r n /D in a g wn 2 DAY 4 I A ft f a t r e / r S n u o n o s n et 2. Morning
3. Midday

7 4. Mid-afternoon

5. Pre-sunset meal (iftar)
Morning NIGHT 6 Evening
6. 2-hours after iftar am
7. At any time when you have symptoms of low or high blood glucose or are feeling unwell
Midnight
00h00
Stop fasting when: Quick tips
◆ Consult your doctor if you plan to fast to learn your risk.
◆ Blood glucose is below 70mg/dl, 3.9mmol/L ◆ Check your blood glucose levels more often
◆ Blood glucose is above 300mg/dl, 16.6 mmol/L ◆ Drink plenty of water during nonfasting period to avoid dehydration
It is important to measure blood glucose during fasting time again after 1-2 hours
◆ During Iftar, drink sugar-free and decaffeinated drinks to avoid dehydration
◆ To avoid problems during Taraweeh, eat starchy foods (eg. rice, pasta, beans) with Iftar and drink plenty of water
◆ Eat a varied and balanced diet throughout Ramadan
◆ If you feel unwell, immediately break your fast. Make sure to always have your medication with you.
◆ Visit your doctor after Ramadan
What DOES NOT BREAK your fast?
Blood glucose
Injecting insulin monitoring
Consult your doctor for more information idf.org/diabetesandramadan