Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and
Summaries for Patients
Clinical nutrition is a discipline which deals with the prevention, diagnosis and management
of nutritional and metabolic changes related to acute and chronic diseases and conditions
caused by a lack or excess of energy and nutrients. Any nutritional measure, preventive or
curative, targeting individual patients is clinical nutrition.
30 October 2018
1. Introduction ....................................................................................................................... 3
1.1 What is this document about? .................................................................................... 3
1.2 How was this document developed? .......................................................................... 4
1.3 Who is this document intended for? .......................................................................... 4
2. Nutrition in the prevention and management of chronic and long-term conditions ... 5
2.1 Medical nutrition: the patient-professional partnership ............................................ 8
2.2 Health literacy and informed decision-making ........................................................... 9
3. Clinical nutrition guideline development ....................................................................... 10
3.1 Guideline developers ................................................................................................ 10
3.2 Guidelines on clinical nutrition ................................................................................. 12
3.3 Guideline developent processes ............................................................................... 14
The ESPEN process for guideline development................................................................ 14
4. Patient involvement in guidelines development ........................................................... 16
4.1 The extent of patient involvement in guideline development today and the need
for better guidance for patients, e.g. Patient summaries of guidelines .............................. 16
4.2 Patient expertise and experience ............................................................................. 18
4.3 Patient generated nutrition data – an untapped resource....................................... 19
5. Existing clinical nutrition guideline summaries developed by patients for patients ... 20
6. Recommendations .......................................................................................................... 26
6.1 Recommendations for guideline developers ............................................................ 26
6.2 Recommendations for patient organisations ........................................................... 27
7. Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 27
8. Acknowledgements......................................................................................................... 29
2
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
1.1 WHAT IS THIS DOCUMENT ABOUT?
This document is about the development of clinical nutrition guidelines and the importance
of summaries of these for patients as well as the need for patient involvement in the
development processes, the importance of health literacy and informed decision-making
concerning food and nutrition.
The importance of food and nutrition for patients as well as the need for good information
to patients on food and nutrition is highlighted in EPF’s position statement on information
to patients on food and nutrition.1 Please consider EPF’s statement when reading this
document.
Clinical nutrition is a discipline which deals with the prevention, diagnosis and management
of nutritional and metabolic changes related to acute and chronic diseases and conditions
caused by a lack or excess of energy and nutrients. Any nutritional measure, preventive or
curative, targeting individual patients is clinical nutrition. Clinical nutrition includes the
nutritional care of people with cardiovascular disease, obesity, diabetes, dyslipidaemias,
food allergies, intolerances, inborn errors of metabolism as well as any disease where
nutrition plays a role such as cancer, stroke, cystic fibrosis and many more.2
This document explains existing clinical nutrition guideline development processes as well as
outlining shortcomings in existing processes and proposes how patient involvement in the
guideline development process can be improved.
It explains why patient summaries of clinical nutrition guidelines are needed and highlights
the importance of patient involvement in the development of guidelines and patient
summaries alike.
This document aims to inform organisations developing clinical nutrition guidelines how to
better involve patients in this process. This document is also written to provide European
and national patient groups information on scientific nutrition guidelines available for
specific disease areas as well as existing examples of patient friendly summaries of this
information. Where necessary, relevant resources are mentioned where further information
can be found.
The objectives of this document are to:
• Underline the importance of information to patients on food and diet choices
• Emphasise the importance of health literacy and informed decision-making
concerning nutrition;
1 http://www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/policy/nutrition/epf-position-statement---nutrition.pdf
2 ESPEN guidelines on definitions and terminology of clinical nutrition:
http://www.espen.org/files/ESPEN-guidelines-on-definitions-and-terminology-of-clinical-nutrition.pdf
3
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
• Provide an overview of existing nutrition guideline development processes;
• Highlight evidence based scientific nutrition guidance available for specific disease
areas, while giving examples of existing examples of patient friendly summaries of
this information and nutrition guidance developed by patient organisations;
• Explain why patient summaries of clinical nutrition guidelines are needed and inspire
scientific societies and guideline developers;
• Provide recommendations for improving existing guideline development processes,
improving patient involvement and the development of patient summaries.
1.2 HOW WAS THIS DOCUMENT DEVELOPED?
Based on the outcomes of the EU Patient Group Conference on Nutrition3 which took place
in Brussels in June 2017 and in line with EPF’s position statement on information to patients
on food and nutrition4, in February 2018, EPF set up an EU patient task force on nutrition5,
made up of volunteers from the EPF membership as well as other EU patient organisations.
The task force is facilitated and co-led by the EPF Secretariat and EGAN (Patients Network
for Medical Research and Health).
The main objective of this task force was to enhance the development of comprehensive
summaries of recognised nutrition guidelines for patients, following the request of the
patient community, in cooperation with scientific societies and guidelines developers. This
document has also undergone consultation with the wider EPF membership.
This document will be presented at the 2018 edition of the Optimal Nutritional Care for All
(ONCA) Conference taking place in Sintra, Portugal in November 2018.
1.3 WHO IS THIS DOCUMENT INTENDED FOR?
This document is primarily intended for patient and carer organisations and also scientific
societies and organisations developing clinical nutrition guidelines. Healthcare professionals
who are called upon to give advice may also find this document useful.
DISCLAIMER
This document has no intention of providing individual patients and their caregivers with
nutritional advice. It only describes general situations. For personal advice on nutrition one
should consult a dietitian. Furthermore, the information included in this document is not
exhaustive.
3 http://www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/policy/nutrition/report-nutrition-conference-june-29-2017.pdf
4 http://www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/policy/nutrition/epf-position-statement---nutrition.pdf
5 http://www.eu-patient.eu/whatwedo/Policy/nutrition/eu-patient-task-force-on-nutrition/
4
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
Nutrition plays an important role in both health and chronic disease management. Indeed,
for many people attaining good nutrition is not a simple question of having good eating
habits or choosing the ‘right’ foods. Some medical conditions mean that even when a
person makes good nutritional and lifestyle choices, achieving nutritional health remains
challenging. It is also important to keep in mind that in some cases, foods or food elements
can also trigger the onset of specific diseases, for example food allergies and intolerance
and/ or food poisoning and infections.
Making good choices about one’s diet is not just an important way to reduce the risk of the
onset of chronic conditions and maintain health. Nutrition also has a key part to play in the
management of a chronic condition and health outcome as well as in secondary prevention
and prevention of multimorbidity. Appropriate nutrition can prevent certain symptoms,
delay the onset of complications, and improve health outcomes for some patients. Eating
the right kinds of foods can improve well-being and physical strength, whereas poor
nutrition can lead to reduced immunity, impaired physical and mental development, and
reduced productivity.6 Moreover, depending on a patients’ condition, treatment, lifestyle,
ability, age and environment, certain foods will be more appropriate for some patients. In
these cases, nutrition should also be adapted according to the patient's needs. This is very
relevant when a disease affects taste, often as a side-effect of the use of medication.
For some types and phases of disease it is not
possible to maintain a normal nutritional status
and/or avoid disease symptoms with personalised
diets and standard foods alone. In such cases
specialised nutritional products (medical
nutrition) are needed to supplement the diet, or to
replace food. In these cases, patients are partially
or entirely dependent on medical nutrition.
Medical nutrition products have been designed
specifically to meet these medical needs, providing
energy and nutrient-dense solutions in easily
delivered forms. Medical nutrition may be oral
(oral nutritional supplements), enteral (via the
stomach or intestine) or parenteral (via the vein).
Such nutrition formulas are given through a special feeding tube (enteral) or intravenous
6 ESMO (European Society for Medical Oncology). Handbook on Nutrition and Cancer. Lugano: ESMO Press;
2011. ECPC (European Cancer Patient Coalition). Living Well During Cancer Treatment. Brussels: ECPC; 2017.
5
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
catheter (parenteral). Most often this can be done in a patients’ own surroundings (at
home), however it is sometimes given in hospitals, especially in more critical periods.
The examples below provide disease-specific explanations of the important role nutrition
plays in the management of certain chronic conditions.
Coeliac disease is a lifelong autoimmune disorder where gluten - a protein found in wheat,
rye, oats and barley triggers an abnormal response of the immune system which causes
damage to the small intestine and left untreated can lead to malabsorption and
malnutrition. The immune reaction may affect other organs also, therefore coeliac disease
may manifest with various symptoms outside the digestive system. The only available
treatment for coeliac disease is a strict and lifelong gluten-free diet. Therefore, good
nutritional counselling is essential. Under the gluten-free diet, symptoms will improve in
most cases, the antibody levels will gradually normalise, and the intestine will mostly
recover.
Cancer patients are at a particularly high risk of malnutrition because both the disease and
its treatments threaten their nutrition status (state of nourishment of a patient). Yet cancer-
related nutritional risk is sometimes overlooked or under-treated by clinicians, patients, and
their families. Depending on the type of cancer and stage of treatment, guidance can differ.
Additionally, cancer patients’ taste and ability to eat can also be significantly affected.
Sometimes disease conditions malnutrition, due to lack of appetite, problems in swallowing,
increased catabolism or caused by treatment; known as "malnutrition related to the
disease". For instance, people with throat cancer can have serious swallowing problems.7
There are two main types of diabetes, type 1 and type 2. There are some other types of
diabetes too, such as gestational diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is a lifelong condition where the
blood glucose (sugar) level is too high because the body cannot make a hormone called
insulin. In Type 2 diabetes the blood glucose level is too high because the body does not
produce enough insulin, or the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces. Insulin
allows the glucose in the blood to enter cells and fuel our bodies. In addition to symptoms
of diabetes, over a long period of time, high glucose levels in the blood can seriously
damage the heart, veins and arteries, eyes (neurological complications), feet and kidneys.
These are known as complications of diabetes. A key requirement in preventing
complications is maintaining good blood glucose (glycaemic) control, blood pressure and
cholesterol. Comprehensive nutritional information, education and training is imperative in
order for people with diabetes to be able to adequately manage their condition. This may
include calculating the amount of carbohydrates, recognizing hidden sugar within food
ingredients and knowing the amount of salt and fats.
Good nutritional care is a fundamental element of the management of Huntington disease,
a hereditary, degenerative neurological condition. Weight loss is a well-known and common
7 http://www.eu-
patient.eu/contentassets/3998bf037bca4ddc890b934a3d1b460d/patient_perspectives_on_nutrition_-1.pdf
6
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
problem experienced by many patients with Huntington disease. Many patients lose weight
unnoticed due to high energy needs and other food or diet problems therefore guidance on
diet is essential.8
Mucopolysaccharide Diseases (MSP) are rare or very rare hereditary metabolic diseases
which require a certain medical nutrition, a medical diet, which in most of these diseases is
the only way of treating them to avoid or at least delay damage of organs, mental and
physical disabilities and premature death. These diets must be prescribed and monitored by
expert healthcare professionals. Regular information and counselling to patients and their
families are indispensable to enable patients to follow these very strict diets and encourage
their continuous adherence.
The so-called western lifestyle with changing nutrition, gut flora, air pollution, chemicals and
processed food have been studied a lot in connection with the development of allergy and
asthma. For food allergy, the only treatment is avoidance and people and families with food
allergy rely on food labelling. For some people with food allergy their diet is so restrictive
that clinical food supplements are needed to ensure good nutrition. Management of food
allergy always requires a mandatory nutritional guidance by a dietician or other healthcare
professional. Severe food allergy can be highly limiting for patients and families and requires
education of all actors in the food chain, including schools, catering, and restaurants.
Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) cause a chronic (systemic)
inflammation of the airways, impaired lung function, airflow obstruction, morbidity and
mortality. People with COPD can be at risk of fragility, because the disease, and the lack of
oxygen also consumes muscles. Therefore, and especially in severe COPD, clinical nutrition is
needed to ensure proteins, vitamins and minerals are provided. The disease also ‘consumes
more’ of these and therefore nutrition and professional support on diet is needed. Often
people with COPD have other chronic diseases like diabetes or heart disease which also
come with a specific dietary guidance.
Chronic kidney disease can require a kidney friendly diet to prevent more kidney damage.
People living with chronic kidney disease may need to limit fluids, eat a low protein diet,
limit salt, potassium, phosphorus and other electrolytes. This can prevent certain minerals
building up in the body.
Cardiovascular disease - Consumption of long chain omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids,
fish, fruit and vegetables, nuts, fibre and replacing saturated fats with polyunsaturated fatty
acids are associated with beneficial heart effects while consumption of saturated fatty acids,
trans fatty acids and salt are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events. A
Mediterranean dietary pattern is often recommended.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (predominantly Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis) is
increasingly common and potential dietary factors have been suggested to be at cause.
8 https://topaz.nl/media/191480/nutritional-care-for-hd-patients.pdf
7
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
Malnutrition is highly prevalent in IBD, especially in Crohn's disease. Increased energy and
protein requirements are observed in some patients. These patients may need medical
nutrition in different phases throughout their lives, especially during the acute phase of
their disease.9
Chronic intestinal failure (CIF) is the long-lasting reduction of gut function, below the
minimum necessary for the absorption of macronutrients and/or water and electrolytes,
such that intravenous supplementation is required to maintain health and/or growth. Even
though it is very important that these patients maintain some ingestion of food and
nutrients adapted to the characteristic of their intestine, they depend on parenteral
nutrition (or iv fluids) to support their life.10
Further detail on the importance of nutrition in the context of different chronic conditions is
highlighted in EPF’s position statement on information to patients on food and nutrition.
2.1 MEDICAL NUTRITION: THE PATIENT-PROFESSIONAL PARTNERSHIP
Patients and caregivers must be involved in decisions taken, together with healthcare
professionals, regarding the need for nutritional assistance as well as medical nutrition. To
maximise positive outcomes and to ensure patient safety, healthcare professionals, who are
experts in this area should make recommendations about initiating, monitoring and
cessation of medical nutrition. EPF supports the notion of a Nutrition Support Team (NST),
which is a multidisciplinary team consulted to manage the complex nutritional needs of
patients (e.g. enteral and parenteral) which serves the primary responsibility of assuring
that patients receive optimal nutrition support. Core members can include doctors,
dietitians, nurses and pharmacists. Activities range from direct patient care to the
development of guidelines and protocols for implementation by other healthcare workers.
Healthcare professionals should use evidence-based guidelines to assist them in selecting
the most appropriate method of nutritional support for their patient, taking account of a
wide variety of factors including:
• the goals of care, in a shared-decision making context
• patient’s nutritional needs and wishes
• ability to take, digest, absorb, metabolize or excrete foods, nutrients or metabolites
• diagnosis and prognosis
• patient’s ability to adhere to the intervention
9 http://www.espen.org/files/ESPEN-guideline_Clinical-nutrition-in-inflammatory-bowel-disease.pdf
10 http://www.espen.org/files/ESPEN-
Guidelines/1__ESPEN_guidelines_on_chronic_intestinal_failure_in_adults.pdf
8
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
• patient safety and patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) and patient reported
experience measures (PREMs) where relevant
It is essential that healthcare professionals combine their clinical experience and practical
experience with a sound knowledge of the evidence base in making a recommendation or in
the provision of nutritional support, e.g. a patient with a poor appetite may not be able or
willing to consume extra food or may lack the energy or ability to prepare it. A patient who
has lost the ability to swallow may need enteral (via the stomach) addition of nutrition and a
patient with intestinal obstruction may need parenteral nutrition (via the vein). Similarly,
financial aspects such as adequate equipment to prepare food and / or cost of concentrate
food should not be neglected.
2.2 HEALTH LITERACY AND INFORMED DECISION-MAKING
Reliable, understandable, relevant and easily accessible information is the cornerstone of
individual patient empowerment, quality of life, diseases management and meaningful
patient involvement in health policy.
Health literacy is a key determinant of health.11
“Health literacy is linked to literacy and entails people’s knowledge, motivation and
competencies to access, understand, appraise, and apply health information in order to
make judgments and take decisions in everyday life concerning healthcare, disease
prevention and health promotion to maintain or improve quality of life during the life
course.”12
Being health literate empowers patients to understand information about their health and
make more informed decisions. Low health literacy, or the lack of health literacy-friendly
information can make daily life choices difficult for patients.
In the nutrition arena, health literacy-friendly measures recommended by WHO include
making relevant and understandable information available from reliable sources.13
It is important that research, guidelines, care standards, recommendations and good
practices concerning nutrition reach patients and citizens. Research and guidelines should
be explained and disseminated in a patient-friendly way, and their communication and
dissemination should be improved. Patient organisations, healthcare professionals,
governments and the wider education system, all have their specific roles to play in this area
if we are to improve health awareness and maximise impact upon the health and lifestyle
choices of future generations.
According to the Value+ project definition, meaningful patient involvement means that
patients take an active role in activities or decisions that will have consequences for the
11 http://www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/policy/healthliteracy/health-literacy-infographic.pdf
12 https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2458-12-80
13 Health Literacy. The solid facts. WHO Europe, 2013, page 41-42, link
9
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
patient community, because of their specific knowledge and relevant experience as
patients.14 Patients and patient organisations are best placed to advise on what matters
most to patients, how to define messages, in what form these should be delivered, through
which channels they should be communicated, and finally on accessibility issues for patients
with disabilities.
3.1 GUIDELINE DEVELOPERS
Accurate information on specific nutritional needs is often not easy to find and sometimes
patients and their caregivers do not receive appropriate guidance or answers to their
questions from health care professionals. In addition, patients also sometimes find it
difficult to get a referral to a specialised dietitian for their questions on food and nutrition.
Insufficient time and material dedicated to this in educational curricula of health care
professionals can be an important cause for this lack of information. There is progress, but it
is the complexity of the issue in particular that is underestimated.
However, there is increasing interest from health care professionals in the topic of food and
nutrition. Also, there is a growing number of professionals trained on matters of food and
nutrition and their impacts on human health. Qualifications and professional terminology
(i.e. nutrition scientist, public health nutritionist, dietitian, nutritionist, clinical nutritionist,
and sports nutritionist) are different in different countries as is the level of education they
receive.15 In this document, we refer to all qualified nutrition professionals. 16
Nutrition guidelines are very often developed by national scientific bodies, societies and
institutions considering national circumstances, regulations, stakeholders etc. and making
recommendations on the national level. At a European level, several societies and
organisations work with national affiliates to develop European nutrition guidance.
Consequently, patients seeking information about nutrition are advised to also consult
national guidelines because they may vary or complete higher-level guidelines according to
national regulations. It is not possible here to provide examples and links for every country
here, however the following section aims to give an overview of some of these guideline
developers.
The European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism (ESPEN)17 is one of the
scientific organisations that aims to encourage the rapid diffusion of knowledge and its
14 http://www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/projects/valueplus/doc_epf_handbook.pdf
15 Doctors receive on average 25 hours of nutrition education in Europe (Eu J Cin Nutr 2014) compared to
dietitians who spend over 3 years studying nutrition and diet.
16 Please consult professional registers to find qualified professionals for advice.
17 www.espen.org
10
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
application in the field of clinical nutrition. One of its core activities is the organisation of
consensus papers and guidelines about clinical nutritional care. National level ESPEN-like
organisations18 have a similarly important role.
Another important professional organisation is the European Federation of the
Associations of Dietitians (EFAD).19 EFAD has developed a Life Long Learning (LLL) Strategy
to promote the development of the dietetic profession and developing dietetics on a
scientific and professional level. One of EFAD’s members, the British Dietetic Association
(BDA) has developed several lay fact sheets for citizens and patients as well as family
members and caregivers.20Another important resource is the Nutrition and Diet Resources
UK website21, a not-for-profit provider of nutrition and diet resources to support patient-
centred care.
Disease-specific professional organisations or research networks such as United European
Gastroenterology (UEG)22, the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology
Hepatology and Nutrition (ESPGHAN)23, the European Crohn´s and Colitis Organisation
(ECCO)24, the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO)25 and the European
Huntington’s Disease Network (EHDN)26 also have an important role in developing
therapeutic guidance, protocols and evidence-based clinical guidelines.
In Germany, the Association of the Scientific Medical Societies (AWMF) (German
equivalent to NICE), is “a network of Scientific Medical Societies, which advises the
government of the Federal Republic of Germany as well as the governments of the German
federal countries ("Bundesländer") in all topics of scientific medicine and medical research
and classification.” They do this in many ways, including the publication of clinical nutrition
guidelines with specific indications.27
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the UK is an independent
public body that provides national guidance and advice to improve health and social care in
England. NICE guidance offers evidence-based recommendations made by independent
Committees on a broad range of topics. The NICE clinical guidelines recommend how
healthcare professionals should care for people with specific conditions. They can cover any
aspect of a condition and may include recommendations about providing information and
18 www.espen.org/societies.
19 www.efad.org
20 https://www.bda.uk.com/foodfacts/home
21 www.ndr-uk.org and more general information at www.nutrition.org.uk
22 https://www.ueg.eu/quality-of-care/
23 http://www.espghan.org/
24 https://www.ecco-ibd.eu/publications/ecco-guidelines-science.html
25 https://www.esmo.org/
26 http://www.ehdn.org/
27 https://www.awmf.org/en/awmf.html; https://www.awmf.org/en/clinical-practice-guidelines.html;
11
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
advice, prevention, diagnosis, treatment 28and longer-term management. These guidelines
are also important for health service managers and commissioners of national health system
services. A general overview of developed guidelines can be found on their website.29
Nutrition is also referred to in guidelines pertaining to specific environments, such as in
surgery for example.30 Although malnutrition accompanies many chronic diseases, it is also
important to recognise situations such as surgery where nutrition has an important impact
on the recovery of patients. The Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) Society31 has in
some cases published guidelines as a joint effort with other medical societies such as ESPEN
and the International Association for Surgical Metabolism and Nutrition (IASMEN). 32
Disease-specific patient organisations also publish guidance and information for patients.
Many of which work with dietitians and medical doctors to check and verify the information
provided. Some patient organisations have also developed evidence-based nutrition
guidelines for health care professionals.33
3.2 GUIDELINES ON CLINICAL NUTRITION
This section gives a couple of examples of European and national guidelines on clinical
nutrition. This section on guidelines is illustrative, rather than exhaustive.
Guidelines on the use of clinical nutrition34 that aim to prevent, manage and treat different
chronic diseases and improve patient outcomes have been developed by The European
Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism (ESPEN) since 1997. These guidelines are
intended for health care professionals and should be used as guidance for taking decisions
about a patients’ nutritional care. See the figure below for a selection of published ESPEN
guidelines35 and guidelines in progress36.
 Nutrition in dementia (2015): published
 Ethical aspects of artificial nutrition and hydration (2016): published
 ESPEN-ESPGHAN-ECFS guidelines on nutrition care for infants,
 children, and adults with cystic fibrosis (2016): published
 Chronic intestinal failure in adults (2016): published
 Nutrition in cancer patients (2017): published
28 https://diabetes-resources-production.s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/resources-s3/2018-
03/1373_Nutrition%20guidelines_0.pdf
29 https://www.nice.org.uk/
30 http://www.espen.org/files/ESPEN-guideline_Clinical-nutrition-in-surgery.pdf
31 http://erassociety.org/patients/
32 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23052794
33 Evidence-based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes, Diabetes UK, link.
34 ESPEN guidelines on definitions and terminology of clinical nutrition: http://www.espen.org/files/ESPEN-
guidelines-on-definitions-and-terminology-of-clinical-nutrition.pdf
35 ESPEN guidelines and consensus papers: http://www.espen.org/guidelines-home/espen-guidelines
36 ESPEN guidelines in progress: http://www.espen.org/guidelines-home/guidelines-in-progress
12
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
 Recommendations for action against cancer-related malnutrition (2017): published
 Clinical nutrition in inflammatory bowel disease (2017): published
 Clinical nutrition in surgery (2017): published
 Neurology (2018): published
 Clinical nutrition and hydration in Geriatrics (2018): published
 ESPGHAN/ESPEN/ESPR/CSPEN guidelines on pediatric parenteral nutrition (2018):
published
 Nutritional support for polymorbid internal medicine patients (2018): published
 Clinical nutrition in the intensive care unit (2018): published
 Liver Disease: work in progress, close to publication
 Home Enteral Nutrition: work in progress
 Home Parenteral Nutrition: work in progress
 Pancreas Disease: work in progress
 Nephrology: work in progress
 Hospital Nutrition: work in progress
Figure 1: ESPEN Guidelines published and in progress since 2015
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the UK have developed
clinical guidelines on ‘Nutrition support for adults: oral nutrition support, enteral tube
feeding and parenteral nutrition’, published in February 2006 and last updated in August
2017. This guideline covers identifying and caring for adults who are malnourished or at risk
of malnutrition in hospital or in their own home or a care home. It offers advice on how oral,
enteral tube feeding and parenteral nutrition support should be started, administered and
stopped. It aims to support healthcare professionals identify malnourished people and help
them to choose the most appropriate form of support.37 NICE has developed a user-friendly
interactive flowchart which brings together everything NICE says on the topic of ‘Nutrition
support in adults’ and provides a summary of the recommended pathway.38 This guideline
is accompanied by a ‘Nutrition support in adults’ quality standard which was also last
updated in August 2017. PINNT (Patients on Intravenous and Naso-gastric Nutrition
Treatment) and the Motor Neurone Disease Association have worked with NICE to promote
this quality standard to commissioners and service providers.39 NICE clinical nutrition
guidance can also be found in NICE’s condition-specific guidelines.40
37 https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg32
38 https://pathways.nice.org.uk/pathways/nutrition-support-in-adults#content=view-node%3Anodes-
indications-for-nutrition-support
39 https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs24
40 https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/conditions-and-diseases
13
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
3.3 GUIDELINE DEVELOPENT
PROCESSES
THE ESPEN PROCESS FOR GUIDELINE
DEVELOPMENT
Since 1997, the European Society for
Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism (ESPEN)
publishes guidelines and position papers on
a regular basis in the journal Clinical
Nutrition41. The details of the methodology
used to develop and publish guidelines is
presented in a standard operation
procedure42. The procedure consists of 10
milestones and is described in the figure
below. This process is lengthy and takes 2 –
3 years till publication.
Figure - Flow chart indicating the structured generation
of an ESPEN guideline.
41 https://www.clinicalnutritionjournal.com/
42 Standard operating procedures for ESPEN guidelines and consensus papers, January 2015,
http://espen.org/guidelines/ESPEN_GuidelinesSOP.pdf
14
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
As part of the dissemination and implementation phase of the guideline development
process, ESPEN intends to carry out the following activities.43
1. Careful examination of the guideline for clarity of language and format.
2. Review by a representative from a patient's organization. This does not automatically
mean that the guideline is also a lay version of the guideline.
3. Presentation of the guideline in different formats (full format for experts, short format
for practitioners, lay version format for patients) and media (print and website).
4. Inclusion of the guideline with algorithms, care pathways, and electronic decision
support tools to complement the guideline.
5. Linking the guideline with relevant organisations and stakeholders.
6. Dissemination of the guidelines via slide sets, oral presentations, and teaching sessions
(e.g. national conferences, LLL education, etc.).
To ensure that ESPEN guidelines are up to date and state of the art, they are revised at
regular intervals (usually every 3–4 years, latest after 5 years).
The need for ongoing additions and updating of a guideline does not only reflect the
availability of new and emerging scientific knowledge, but also depends on the results
obtained from an analysis of the guideline's previous usage. The latter helps to identify
opportunities for improvement.
Although this is an objective of ESPEN, so far, not all steps are achieved systematically. The
lay version format of these guidelines for patients and caregivers are considered by both
patients and ESPEN to be a high priority for future work.
Recent progress has been made to this end. In 2018, ESPEN was attributed a 2 year grant
from the United European Gastroenterology (UEG) which is dedicated to the improved
dissemination of existing clinical practice guidelines and standards and implementation into
practice. This comprises 4 components: shortened versions of the guidelines for
practitioners, translation of shortened versions into national languages, guidelines apps and
lay versions of the shortened guidelines in an accessible format for patients.
EPF and ESPEN have recently confirmed a formal collaboration in the context of this project
with respect to the development of patient versions of guidelines and to ensure strong
patient involvement in the review of new guidelines.
43 ESPEN guideline implementation and update: http://www.espen.org/files/ESPEN-
Guidelines/0__Standard_operating_procedures_for_ESPEN_guidelines_and_consensus_papers_2.pdf
15
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
4.1 THE EXTENT OF PATIENT INVOLVEMENT IN GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
TODAY AND THE NEED FOR BETTER GUIDANCE FOR PATIENTS, E.G.
PATIENT SUMMARIES OF GUIDELINES
Although scientific societies are working hard on the topic of guidelines and consensus
papers, the feeling is that most of this knowledge is insufficiently available for patients and
their caregivers. One of the objectives of this document is to ensure this knowledge is
disseminated to European patient organisations and their members and through them to
individual patients and their families.
It appears that in many EU countries patients and patient organisations do not have a role in
co-developing clinical guidelines with health care professionals.
Systematic patient involvement has however significantly developed over the past years,
although not in a consistent or equal manner across Europe.
Positive examples of patient involvement in nutrition guidelines development are
experienced in several countries however there are fewer known good practices of patient
involvement in central and eastern European countries. In the UK, BAPEN44 (the UK ESPEN
national association) and the Association of British Dietitians (BDA)45 cooperate strongly
with PINNT UK (Patients on intravenous and nasogastric nutrition therapy)46 in developing
lay-versions of educational material. Similarly, in Germany, the scientific departments of
several patient organisations collaborate with societies like the above-mentioned AWMF,
for example in developing specific indication-oriented guidelines. AWMF online provides
patient information which intends to support the physician-patient-relationship.47 Several
scientific societies also produce patient information as part of their clinical practice
guidelines. In the Netherlands, the Dutch Association for Allergology (NVvA) has designed a
Nutrition Provision Guideline (Richtlijn Voedselprovocatie)48. The idea behind this guideline
is that, in practice, various medical disciplines are involved in the treatment of people with
(suspected) food allergies, therefore, in the case of this guideline, several associations are
involved in its development. Representatives of the patient association, Dutch Anaphylaxis
Network (NAN) and the Food Allergy Foundation (SVA) were also involved in the
development of this guideline. The intended users of this guideline are medical specialists,
nurses, dietitians and doctor's assistants working in the 2nd or 3rd line who are involved in
44 https://www.bapen.org.uk/about-bapen/our-partners/espen
45 https://www.peng.org.uk/publications-resources/resources-for-patients-hcps.php
46 https://pinnt.com/Home.aspx
47 https://www.awmf.org/en/clinical-practice-guidelines/patient-informations.html
48 http://www.nvdv.nl/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/Richtlijn-voedselprovocatie-29-09-2015.pdf
16
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
any way whatsoever in the indication or supervision of patients before, during or after a
food allergy.
At a European level, the Association of European Coeliac Societies (AOECS) was involved in
the development of the European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and
Nutrition (ESPGHAN) nutrition guidelines for the diagnosis of coeliac disease as a full
member of the working group. ESPGHAN is currently in the process of revising this guideline
and has once again invited AOECS to be involved in this review, bringing the patient
perspective to this exercise.
Similarly, ESPEN has started to include patient representatives in this process also, notably
regarding guidelines on liver disease, intensive care and home enteral and parenteral
nutrition. ESPEN has also began to work on translating guidelines on clinical nutrition in IBD
and chronic intestinal failure into lay version guidelines for patients with the European
Federation of Crohn's & Ulcerative Colitis (EFCCA) and the European CanCer Organisation
(ECCO). ESPEN will also soon start to work with EPF with respect to the development of new
lay versions of guidelines for patients.
In addition to good practices of patient involvement in the development of nutrition related
guidelines, there are several examples of good practices of patient involvement in
guideline development that is not necessarily related to nutrition. These should also be
considered when developing meaningful patient involvement processes for nutrition
guideline development.
In Germany, the National Care Guidelines Programme (Nationale VersorgungsLeitlinie NVL)
is a joint initiative of the German Medical Association (Bundesärztekammer), National
Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians (Kassenärztliche Bundesvereinigung)
and the Association of Scientific Medical Societies for the Promotion of Quality in Medicine
(Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften zur
Qualitätsförderung in der Medizin).49 The National Care Guidelines, are supplemented by a
booklet on Patient Guidelines, which serve as companion information for patients to
National Care guidelines on asthma, COPD, diabetes, heart failure, coronary heart disease
etc. On behalf of the German Cancer Society, the Medical Centre for Quality in Medicine
(Ärztliches Zentrum für Qualität in der Medizin - ÄZQ) has also developed patient guidelines
on cancer (including breast cancer, colon cancer, cervical cancer, gastric cancer and prostate
cancer). These are available online in full text.50 In addition to information that is identical in
content to the corresponding health care guidelines but rewritten in lay terms, these patient
guidelines contain additional information that meet patients’ needs. They explain the
optimal care structures, provide background information on the functioning of the
49 https://www.leitlinien.de/nvl/
50 https://www.leitlinienprogramm-onkologie.de/index.php?id=8&type=0
17
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
respective body organ or system and its pathological change, initiate self-management and
support the doctor-patient communication (e.g. through checklists).
The Guidelines International Network (G-I-N PUBLIC) is an international working group of
researchers, health professionals and patient/public representatives that aims to support
effective patient and public involvement in the development and implementation of clinical
practice guidelines around the world and has developed a toolkit51 to this end.
Patient and public involvement in guideline development has three main rationales, namely
more patient-centred health care provision, more democratic health care policy-making and
quality improvement of care and policy. Being aware of these different rationales for patient
and public involvement can be helpful to manage divergent expectations that public and
patient involvement participants may hold.52
4.2 PATIENT EXPERTISE AND EXPERIENCE
Living with a condition provides patients with unique expertise of a condition and
experience of health care and services. In this sense, the unique position of patients
provides valuable insights to healthcare guidance. There are many examples where patients
have influenced the recommendations made as mentioned above. A concrete example of
this is in Spanish guidelines on psoriasis for example, where experts and researchers focused
on percentage coverage of the body in psoriasis whereas the patients said that the location
of psoriasis matters more to them, such as the hands or face.
Furthermore, patient involvement has been shown to contribute to a more transparent and
democratic health policy making process.53
Another important reason why patient versions of guidelines are needed is to give individual
patients and family members a better understanding of why certain nutritional advice is
given and to improve adherence and concordance54 to nutritional advice.
51 https://www.g-i-n.net/working-groups/gin-public/toolkit
52 https://www.g-i-n.net/working-groups/gin-public/toolkit
53 http://www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/projects/valueplus/doc_epf_handbook.pdf
54 EPF Position paper on adherence and concordance: http://www.eu-
patient.eu/globalassets/policy/adherence-compliance-concordance/adherence-paper-final-rev_external.pdf
18
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
In all medical and prevention situations adherence is a
crucial issue. But it is also known that adherence is also
difficult to tackle adequately. We will not go in detail here
about these issues. Especially for patients being dependent
on medical nutrition for 24 hours per day, peer support
and support from family members plays an important role
in terms of starting the therapy and to continue with it.
Improvement can also be seen in terms of increase in body
weight, a vital sign for patients who are below ideal body
weight.
The figure on the right shows the contrast of two different
food regimes, often within one family. This also illustrates
that where daily meals are a social and mostly pleasant
event, some family members are unable to fully participate in these meals and sometimes
may feel isolated. This happens not only in family situations, but also in societal events with
friends, at work or in sport events.
Patient groups in disease areas where (medical) nutrition plays an important role have a lot
of expertise on the practical obstacles patients and families experience, such as the lack of
understanding and facilities at emergency hospital units, or ignorance and mistrust while
traveling through customs and reimbursement issues. For more information see the
International Alliance of Patient Groups for Chronic Intestinal Failure and Home Artificial
Nutrition (PACIFHAN)55 and the websites of PACIFHAN members56.
4.3 PATIENT GENERATED NUTRITION DATA – AN UNTAPPED RESOURCE
The way ESPEN and most other professional organisations develop guidelines is a highly
scientific process, which is very evidence-based. From practice, we know that many patients
and families are experimenting with varying individual diets. Most of the time this will not
lead to scientific advice which can be used for guideline development. An interesting
approach to this problem has been undertaken by several patient advocates together with
health institutions in The Netherlands in a project called BeyondRCT57 which is exploring the
collection of data via a ‘Practice Based Evidence Building’58 method.
Biomedical research and Randomized Controlled Trials (RCT’s) have generated a lot of very
valuable insights but have severe limitations as well. One of those limitations is that patient
inclusion criteria are often very strict, thereby excluding the complexity of multiple chronic
conditions that people suffer from, and the diversity of lifestyles that people lead.
55 http://pacifhan.org/
56 http://pacifhan.org/pacifhan-members/
57 http://www.beyondrct.net/
58 http://www.pennutrition.com/index.aspx
19
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
Furthermore, the research setting is highly controlled, severely limiting the ability to
translate the results to the environment of daily life. Citizens, and especially patients,
increasingly question the usefulness of proposed health approaches to their specific
conditions. They demand more inclusive research strategies, in which their highly
contextualised experiences tangibly impact the generation of knowledge’.59 A study on
prostate cancer and nutrition is also being conducted by the Rotterdam Erasmus Medical
Centre and organized by the Dutch platform Patients and Food60.
This section highlights summaries of recognised clinical nutrition guidelines and guidance
developed by patient groups and organisations for patients.
Patient organisations have, to date, developed several initiatives of existing guidance on
nutrition and different chronic conditions in a multitude of different formats. The initiatives
listed and explained below are intended for patients and serve as a guide and inspiration to
scientific societies and guideline developers. These examples are far from exhaustive and
we welcome receiving more examples.
Developing summaries of recognised nutrition guidelines for patients is a complex exercise.
Nutrition relates to different chronic conditions in very different ways, be it coeliac,
diabetes, allergies or cancer to name a few. Furthermore, the way in which nutrition relates
to different subsets of these diseases and different patients also varies greatly, adding to
the complexity of such guidance.
Further detail on the importance of nutrition in the context of the different chronic
conditions addressed below is highlighted in EPF’s position statement on information to
patients on food and nutrition.
Coeliac Disease and Nutrition
There are several clinical guidelines and publications on nutrition and coeliac disease.
People living with coeliac are considered as experts and the professionals very much depend
on the education they receive from expert patients or patients’ associations. Information for
patients is developed by patient organisations such as the Association of European Coeliac
Societies (AOECS)61.
59 http://www.beyondrct.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Executive-Summary-BeyondRCT-2018.pdf
60 https://patientenvoeding.nl/studie-prostaatkanker-en-voeding-2018/
61 https://www.aoecs.org/coeliac-disease
20
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
The Hungarian Coeliac Society (HCS), a member of AOECS, is currently working within an
Interreg CE project on "Innovative patient-centred health care services - advantages of
establishing a close CE network in coeliac disease patient healthcare” together with 11 other
project partners (from Hungary, Slovenia, Croatia, Italy/Trieste and Germany/Munich). One
of the main aims of the project is to develop 2 eLearning tools (one for patients and one for
HCPs) and one App for family doctors to become more familiar with coeliac disease, to
comply with the lifelong rules, increase the ratio of diagnosed patients and shorten the
diagnostic time. The eLearning tool for patients (in English, German and Hungarian) is
currently undergoing beta testing. Other translations are also in progress. The project will
end in May 2019.
Cancer and Nutrition
The European Cancer Patient Coalition (ECPC)
performed a European Survey62 of 907 people with
cancer about the importance of nutrition, of which
more than 90% did not receive any information about
weight loss because of cancer (cachexia) from their
health professionals. Almost 70% reported that they
lost weight after the cancer diagnosis and more than
70% of the respondents did not know the meaning of
the term ‘cachexia’. ECPC therefore believes that there
is a need to empower individual patients and patient
associations by producing more information on cancer
patients’ nutritional needs. Therefore, in 2018 ECPC
published a booklet entitled ‘Living well during cancer
treatment’.63 This booklet is based on the ESPEN guidelines on nutrition in cancer patients64
and the ESMO handbook of Nutrition and Cancer.65 Within this booklet, ECPC have also
developed a ‘Cancer Patient’s Charter of Rights for Appropriate and Prompt Nutritional
Support’.
The ECPC ‘Living well during Cancer Treatment’ Nutrition Booklet (2018) addresses
common questions patients might have about diet, nutrition and physical activity during
cancer treatment, and provides essential patient information regarding nutrition and
cancer, based on recognised guidance on nutrition and cancer.
62 https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article/28/suppl_5/mdx385.007/4109504
63 http://www.ecpc.org/edu/nutrition
64 http://www.espen.info/wp/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/ESPEN-cancer-guidelines-2016-final-
published.pdf
65 https://oncologypro.esmo.org/Education-Library/Handbooks/Nutrition-and-Cancer
21
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
Breast Cancer and Nutrition
As a growing body of evidence shows the link between
healthy choices and a lower risk of developing breast
cancer, EUROPA DONNA - The European Breast Cancer
Coalition (ED) established Breast Health Day (BHD) on 15
October 2008. The BHD campaign stresses the importance
of being active, eating a well-balanced diet and maintaining
a normal body weight. While studies have not linked
specific diets to breast cancer risk, nutrition is still
important, with excess body weight and physical inactivity
accounting for 25-33 percent of breast cancer cases.66 In
this respect, Europa Donna have recently launched a new
section of their website dedicated to prevention providing
information on primary and secondary prevention as well as
preventing recurrence.67
Diabetes and Nutrition
“There is not a one-size-fits all
Several materials and guidance on nutrition and
diabetes have been developed by patient approach when it comes to making
organisations and societies to support newly- food choices, so these new guidelines
diagnosed patients or patients at risk of take this into account. It is important
developing type 2 diabetes. that people with diabetes, and those
at risk, are supported to choose the
In the context of a project called MANAGE-CARE68,
right foods for them to help them to
the European region of the International
achieve their specific treatment goals
Diabetes Federation (IDF Europe) has developed
a patient empowerment booklet69 which includes and improve their health and quality
guidance on nutrition. This booklet is available in of life.” Douglas Twenefour, Deputy
10 different languages.70 Head of Care and co-chair of the
guidelines group, Diabetes UK
66 IARC (2002). IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention, Volume 6, Weight control and physical activity. Lyon,
France: International Agency for Research on Cancer, link.
67 https://prevention.europadonna.org/
68 http://www.managecare-project.eu/
69 https://www.idf.org/images/English_web.pdf
70 https://www.idf.org/our-network/regions-members/europe/eu-research-projects/14-manage-care-
patients-empowerment-booklet.html
22
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
Diabetes UK has been publishing dietary guidelines71 since 1982, with updates and revisions
issued at regular intervals. Each revision reflects advances in the available evidence that
impacts changes in approaches to dietary management of diabetes. In March 2018,
Diabetes UK published a comprehensive guide72 intended for health care professionals on
evidence-based nutrition guidelines for the prevention and management of diabetes type
2. Diabetes UK have also developed materials intended for patients and their carers
together with registered dietitians who translate
the latest public and scientific research into
practical guidance.73 Furthermore, Diabetes UK
have also developed advice and tips on everything
from healthy swaps, understanding food labels,
how to cook healthier meals, meal planning and
shopping on a budget.74
Allergy and Respiratory diseases and Nutrition
Food Allergy
The Finnish patient association Allergy, Skin and Asthma
Federation produces patient education material together
with the top experts in the country and including the
patient perspective. For food allergy, there is patient
guidance on food allergy in adults75 and for food allergy in
children76. These include causes, managing food allergy,
including diet, emergencies, psychosocial factors and tips.
They have also helped co-create with professionals a web
portal called ERIMENU (‘different menu’) in which you can
insert your diet whether its allergy, coeliac disease or
other and receive information on food products and
recipes that are suitable for you.77
Building on a long patient organisation tradition, all Nordic allergy and asthma associations
and heart and lung associations have such materials and guidance, but also educational
resources both for patients and their families and professionals and do important work
71 Example: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1046/j.1464-5491.2003.01104.x
72 file:///C:/Users/Katie/Desktop/Perso/Health%20Insurance/DKV/4.%20Remboursement_24Mars-
3Ao%C3%BBt2018/1373_Nutrition%20guidelines_0.pdf
73 https://www.diabetes.org.uk/guide-to-diabetes/enjoy-food/our-dietary-advice-explained
74 Helping families with diabetes shop, cook and eat, Diabetes UK: https://www.diabetes.org.uk/Guide-to-
diabetes/Managing-your-diabetes/Healthy-eating
75 https://www.allergia.fi/site/assets/files/1231/aikuisten_ruoka_allergia_web_pages_2803-2018.pdf
76 https://www.allergia.fi/site/assets/files/1210/lasten_ruoka_allergia_opas_web_spreads.pdf
77 https://www.erimenu.fi/
23
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
through national helplines and peer support groups organised by their local and regional
member associations.78
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
COPD Support Ireland, a charity set up to support all those living with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease has developed a leaflet entitled “Nutrition & Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease”79 which provides guidance for people living with COPD on how to eat
well, tips to encourage eating, for losing weight and eating a balanced diet and for gaining
weight or improving nutritional intake.
In the Netherlands, “Zorgstandard Asthma- Goede zorg voor iedereen met astma” ("Care
Standard Asthma- Good care for anyone with asthma)80 is a patient version of the
Zorgstandaard astma voor volwassenen81 (Care Standard for Asthma for adults), which is
based on medical guidelines. The purpose of the booklet is to help patients cope with their
disease in the best possible way, it includes a chapter on nutrition for asthma. In this
booklet patients can find information about their disease, which care they can receive and
what they can do themselves to manage their disease. This book also states what care the
caregivers should provide, allowing patients to know exactly what they can do themselves
and what they can expect from a physician. The patient version has been developed by
Longfonds (‘Lung Fund’), a health foundation that includes patient organisations.
Nutrition and Neurological Diseases
Many people and especially older people live with neurological
diseases, such as dementia or Alzheimer’s disease. Professional
guidelines exist, but more importantly there is a guide available for
patients, family members and caregivers. The guide ‘Eating and Living
with Dignity: A Practical Guide for Caregivers and Family Members of
Persons with Dementia’82 was developed by the Israel Ministry of
Health in collaboration with the Alzheimer’s Association of Israel and
JDC Israel ESHEL.
Another important neurological disease is Huntington’s disease.
Although there are no European nutritional guidelines available to
date, the European Huntington’s Disease Network Standards of Care
Dietitians Group has brought together expert dietitians from across Europe to produce
78 http://www.efanet.org/who-we-are/members
79 http://copd.ie/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Nutrition-and-COPD.pdf
80 https://bestellen.longfonds.nl/product/patientenversie-zorgstandaard-copd/
81 http://www.longalliantie.nl/files/4113/7335/4473/Zorgstandaard_Astma_Volwassenen.pdf
82 https://www.health.gov.il/PublicationsFiles/Dementia_Nutrition_en.pdf
24
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
nutrition guidelines to promote optimal nutritional screening, assessment and
management of individuals throughout all stages of the disease83.
In addition, the Australian organisation Huntington’s New South Wales has developed
guidelines for meeting the nutritional needs of people with Huntington disease84and a
booklet entitled ‘Eating and Swallowing Difficulties in Huntingdon Disease’85 which
provides practical advice for carers.
Nutrition and Neuromuscular disorders
Patients with neuromuscular disorders are fully aware that optimal and personalised diets
are one of the cornerstones of wellbeing and quality of life.
The Treat-NMD Neuromuscular network has developed standards of care for spinal
muscular atrophy (SMA) for example which include guidance on nutrition. These are also
available in multiple languages.86 Cure SMA have also developed support and care
publications including a publication specifically related to nutrition.87
Medical nutrition
Lay information on Medical Nutrition can be found on the website of the International
Alliance of Patient Organisations for Chronic Intestinal Failure and Home Artificial
Nutrition (PACIFHAN)88.
ESPEN released guidelines on enteral nutrition in 2006 and parenteral nutrition in 2009.
Since 2010, ESPEN changed the focus to disease-specific guidelines. Currently ESPEN is
working on a guideline for home enteral nutrition (HEN) and home parenteral nutrition
(HPN). In this guideline review process patient’s experts are included.
Very relevant information and resources, including a video library and online education89
can also be found on the website of the OLEY Foundation, an American organisation who
strives to enrich the lives of those living with home intravenous nutrition and tube feeding
through education, advocacy, and networking.
Nutrition and Pre-conception care and early life
The Early Nutrition Academy90 has developed an Early Nutrition eAcademy, an e-learning
platform, which consists of different modules, each focusing on one defined topic within the
83 https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/pdf/10.2217/nmt.11.69
84 https://www.huntingtonsnsw.org.au/sites/default/files/Nutrition%20Guidelines.pdf
85https://www.huntingtonsnsw.org.au/sites/default/files/Eating%20and%20Swallowing%20Difficulties%20Apri
l%202012.pdf
86 http://www.treat-nmd.eu/care/sma/family-guide-translations/
87 http://www.curesma.org/documents/support--care-documents/nutrition-basics.pdf
88 www.pacifhan.org
89 https://oley.org/page/MyHPN_Modules
90 https://www.early-nutrition.org/en/
25
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
field of early nutrition. Although these modules are developed for professionals, patient
representatives can also use them. To date the following modules are available online:
• Nutrition and Lifestyle During Pregnancy
• Breastfeeding
• Infant Formula Feeding
• Complementary Feeding
One of the partners of the Early Nutrition Academy is the European Foundation for the Care
of Newborn Infants (EFCNI)91. EFCNI has developed numerous information materials such as
factsheets in lay language for families. Another organisation specialised in this field, is
Preparing for Life92.
Nutrition and Persons in Older Age
The European Nutrition Health Alliance (ENHA), of which EPF is a partner, has spent the last
ten years advocating for more attention to be given to nutritional problems in older age. In
several EU countries, national steering committees promote screening of people in older
age for their nutritional status.93 ENHA has in recent years broadened its scope to promote
optimal nutritional care for all, throughout the lifecycle.94
The European Federation of the Associations of Dietitians (EFAD) has a specific working
group of dietitians working with older adults. They have special knowledge, skills and
attitudes which underpin gerontology and geriatric nutrition. Especially sarcopenia (the loss
of skeletal muscle mass and strength as a result of ageing) and age-related frailty is an issue
in less active older adults as compared to those older adults who are healthy and active.
Although osteoporosis is an issue for all age groups, it can be of specific concern for older
adults. The International Osteoporosis Foundation for example has developed a brochure
which contains a lot of information.95
6.1 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GUIDELINE DEVELOPERS
Recommendations for improving guideline development processes, developing patient
summaries of guidelines for patients and patient involvement:
91 https://www.efcni.org/
92 https://preparingforlife.net/
93 https://www.fightmalnutrition.eu/
94 https://european-nutrition.org/
95 https://www.iofbonehealth.org/good-nutrition-healthy-bones
26
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
• EPF recommends societies developing clinical nutrition guidelines to also develop lay
summaries of guidelines for patients in a systematic and transparent way, through
co-design, together with patients, consulting patient organisations throughout the
process with formal cooperation agreements and appropriate compensation.
• EPF recommends guideline developers to involve patients and their organisations
throughout the development of evidence based clinical nutrition guidelines; in the
scoping, prioritisation, drafting and patient summary development stages, with
appropriate compensation, in accordance with the Value+ project principles.96
• EPF recommends that the outcome of the process (patient summaries and clinical
nutrition guidelines- be easily available (“on one site with one click”), in plain
language and available in as many languages as possible.
• EPF recommends that food based dietary guidelines be introduced as well as person-
centred recommendations relating to food and diet choice in evidence based clinical
nutrition guidance. ‘People do not eat nutrition, but they do eat food’.
6.2 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PATIENT ORGANISATIONS
• EPF invites patient organisations to develop strategies on how their involvement in
the development of clinical guidelines, care standards and patient versions of these
materials could be enhanced. The development of these materials could also
enhance shared-decision making and adherence.
• EPF invites patient organisations to cooperate with professional societies in the
development of nutrition guidance for patients, in the format of patient summaries
of guidelines for example.
• EPF invites its members to disseminate this document widely to their networks and
to inform their members of existing clinical nutrition guidance, summaries for
patients and patient-led initiatives highlighted throughout.
Patients and their organisations have many questions when it comes to chronic conditions
and relevant food and nutrition guidance. Similarly, there is growing interest to
communicate on this topic, providing patients and their families with guidance and good
information which meets the needs of patients. Given that nutrition plays an important role
in the prevention, treatment and management of many diseases, many patient
organisations have identified nutrition as a key topic of activity.
There is unfortunately however a lot of inaccurate and even dangerously misleading
information on nutrition and chronic disease on the internet. Fighting against “fake
96 http://www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/projects/valueplus/doc_epf_handbook.pdf
27
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
information” is a challenge. Therefore, when exploring or developing information for
patients, it is wise to consult a well-recognised expert specialised in the disease area for
advice.
Over the past years, EPF has amplified its activities on the topic of food and nutrition.
Activities such as EPF’s recent Position Statement on Information to Patients on Food and
Nutrition97 published in February 2018 sparked the interest and active input of many EPF
members.
In 2019, EPF will publish an executive summary of this document for patients and patients’
organisations to use in their advocacy activities and to facilitate translation.
EPF and EGAN will continue to work closely with societies and guideline developers such as
ESPEN, EFAD and ENHA to improve awareness on the importance of nutrition in the
prevention and management of diseases and the inclusion of nutritional needs in care
standards. Similarly, we will continue to encourage the development of patient summaries
of recognised guidelines, highlighting the importance of patient involvement throughout the
guideline development process. In this regard, EPF hopes to work with guideline developers
on the realisation of patient summaries, how these could be used by patients, what they
would look like and on the dissemination of these.
The process of better patient involvement is not a bottom-down process but depends on
mutual interrelation between patient organisations on the one hand and readiness to
accept patients’ involvement by scientific societies and bodies on the other hand. EPF can
support by describing and providing guidance on the frame which facilitates and enhances
patient involvement but not the specific detailed work and interaction, which very often has
to consider disease specific, or national contexts and circumstances. With this, EPF looks
forward to working closely with its membership to improve clinical nutrition guidance for
patients in Europe.
97 http://www.eu-patient.eu/globalassets/policy/nutrition/epf-position-statement---nutrition.pdf
28
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
EPF would like to thank the members of the EU patient task force on nutrition for their work
throughout 2018.
• Albert Counet, Ligue Huntington Francophone Belge
• Lana Crnjac, European Liver Patients' Association
• Katie Gallagher, European Patients’ Forum (EPF)
• Caroline Heilpern, European Federation of Allergy and Airways Diseases Patients’
Associations (EFA)
• Robert Johnstone, National Voices, UK
• Ernest Karuranga, International Diabetes Federation European Region (IDF Europe)
• Winne Ko, International Diabetes Federation European Region (IDF Europe)
• Tunde Koltai, Hungarian Alliance of Patient Organisations
• Marek Lichota, Appetite for life Association and the International Alliance
• Isabelle Manneh-Vangramberen, European Cancer Patient Coalition (ECPC)
• Virginie Potbury, Association of European Coeliac Societies (AOECS)
• Lala Rabemananjara, International Diabetes Federation European Region (IDF
Europe)
• Roberta Savli, European Federation of Allergy and Airways Diseases Patients’
Associations (EFA)
• Sarah Sleet, Association of European Coeliac Societies (AOECS)
• Cees Smit, Patients Network for Medical Research and Health (EGAN)
• Cathalijne Van Doorne, European Federation of Neurological Associations (EFNA)
EPF consulted the following organisations during the development of this document and
would also like to thank them for their expertise and valuable contributions.
• European Federation of the Associations of Dietitians (EFAD)
• European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism (ESPEN)
29
Clinical Nutrition Guidelines and Summaries for Patients
