898 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
Review
Food habits of the Egyptians: newly
emerging trends
H. Hassan-Wassef1
SUMMARY Accelerated changes are taking place in the food habits of the present day Egyptians. Examples
are drawn from foods that continue to be consumed by those considered guardians of the Egyptian tradition
(Coptic Christians and isolated farming communities) and from interpretation of archaeological evidence.
Recent decades have witnessed the progressive erosion of the traditional Egyptian diet and the introduction
of new foods and eating habits. Sociocultural and economic changes are accelerating this erosion. The main
features of the traditional Egyptian way of eating are presented along with a review of the emerging trends
and of some of the important factors underlying food consumption patterns. Attention is drawn to the potential
risk to health that these new trends represent, in particular to child nutrition and development.
Background Having a rich and fertile soil that is easy
to cultivate, and benefiting from favourable
This paper is derived from a longitudinal climatic conditions, the Nile valley has
study that started 5 decades ago and which since ancient times been renowned for an
is aimed at identifying the ancient origins of abundance of cereals and the variety of cul-
the foods prepared and consumed by tivated legumes and vegetables it produces
present-day Egyptians [H. Hassan-Wassef, [3]. Barring the occasional bad years when
unpublished document, 2005]. The study the floodwaters were low, food and agri-
focuses on the inhabitants of the Nile valley cultural production adequately provided for
and delta, and does not encompass the no- the nutritional and other needs of its people.
madic populations of the desert. The pur- The new food crops and fruit trees that
pose of this investigation is to define and to were introduced into Egypt at various times
make known what can be truly labelled did not significantly change the basic tradi-
Egyptian foods and food habits. It involved tional crop composition, and consequently,
noting how the traditional dietary habits food consumption patterns. The relative
evolved in response to a host of external as abundance and rich variety of foods avail-
well as internal factors. able in Egypt in comparison to its neigh-
For all long-standing food habits and bours resulted in waves of migrants,
culinary traditions that have developed especially to rural areas, who easily adopt-
through the ages, the end product is a bal- ed the Egyptian way of eating. They did not
anced diet in harmony with the physiologi- leave any appreciable mark on local food
cal needs of the people and their habits [4]. The case was different for the
occupation, climate, agriculture, and natu- higher social classes and the rich urban
ral resources [1,2]. The Egyptian has in- dwellers who often copied the eating man-
herited an indigenous food system and ners and foods of the succession of foreign
traditional food habits that can guarantee a rulers who occupied the country [5].
balanced diet.
1Nutritionist and Public Health Policy Analyst, and former Director, World Health Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland.
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 899
The ancient agricultural methods and Methods
crop composition, which had remained un-
The period under review is from the early
changed over thousands of years, allowed
1950s to the end of the 20th century.
ample time for food habits to take root and
Changes in the food habits and in newly
for the gradual emergence of a nutritionally
emerging food consumption trends were
balanced diet that is in harmony with the
noted. Sources of information varied wide-
existing ecosystem and which satisfies the
ly. Historical data and evidence were used
nutritional requirements of the people. Con-
to define the basic features of the tradition-
tinuity was guaranteed through the keepers
al food system, and information collected
of culinary tradition, namely the fellaheen
from the field allowed the identification of
(farming community) women, and through
current food habits and the emerging
the ritual foods of the Copts, the Orthodox
trends. The study of food habits included
Christians of Egypt. The traditional kitch-
collecting information on foods eaten as
ens and earthenware utensils of the fella-
well as on the way they were prepared,
heen, which have survived till today, have
food associations and methods of food
contributed to the perpetuation of many
conditioning and conservation. The supply,
food habits.
availability and accessibility of foods, and
Modernization of the ancient agricultur-
other factors that influence food habits
al methods started only 200 years ago, thus
were taken into account.
initiating the first large scale modifications
in the crop composition. This agricultural
Archaeological evidence and
revolution marked the beginning of a series
historical data
of major irrigation projects and efforts to
Archaeological studies and Egyptian collec-
control the Nile waters [3]. Up to the time
tions in museums around the world yielded
of the Second World War, significant
a wealth of information on the foods con-
changes in food habits essentially followed
sumed by the ancient Egyptians and the
changes in agricultural policy that deter-
evolution of eating habits [6–8]. Accounts
mined land use and crop composition. Giv-
made by travellers to Egypt through the
en the limited total cultivated area of the
ages provided valuable descriptions of
Nile valley and delta, important increases in
foods and beverages and of food consump-
land allocations to a particular crop was
tion patterns [9,10]. The ancient origins of
done at the expense of another, sometimes
foods and of their methods of preparation
with repercussions that could potentially
were identified through a “live” reading of
disrupt the balance of the traditional food
historical evidence coupled with an intimate
system and led to the emergence of nutri-
personal knowledge of current food habits.
tional disorders in the long term. The wide-
The ritual foods of the Copts, which have
spread pellagra (vitamin B3 deficiency) that
been transmitted from generation to gener-
became manifest towards the end of the
ation for nearly 20 centuries, provide an in-
nineteenth century is a case in point. It was
sight into the culinary traditions of the
a consequence of the market driven deci-
ancients [11].
sion to increase the production of cotton,
Historical events that significantly con-
which was done at the expense of wheat
tributed to changes in food habits were
production. The growing dependence on
studied and factors that influenced both the
maize flour in lieu of wheat in the making of
facilitation of and the resistance to change
bread, the staple food, soon led to the
are described. The impact on the traditional
emergence of nutritional deficiency.
900 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
Egyptian food system was assessed in peasants, factory workers, construction
terms of food habits and situations where workers) ate at the workplace.
there was sustained exposure to alien foods Inspection visits were then made to
and habits, e.g. through trade, conquest, kitchens, gardens, and food storage facili-
occupation or the settlement of significant ties. Traditional methods for food preser-
numbers of migrants from neighbouring vation and food conservation still in use
countries. were recorded. The array of spices on the
spice shelf was noted. The frequency of
Information collected from the field home baking and the use of the traditional
Urban and rural communities were visited oven were recorded, as well as the nature
in the Nile delta, on the Mediterranean and form of the cooking utensils, in partic-
coast, in Middle and Upper Egypt and in the ular the presence and use made of the an-
Nubian regions in the south (Fayoum, Beni- cient traditional ones such as the ghorbal
Suef, Minia, Luxor, Aswan, Qalyubia, (sieve made of lamb gut), the matraha
Sharkia, Gharbia, Dakahlia, Beheira, Dami- (long-handled wooden board for flattening
etta, Alexandria and Cairo governorates). dough) or the salaya (quern). Home pro-
Data were collected over a period of 50 duction and consumption of protein-rich
years, in all seasons. Interviews were con- foods was investigated, and the practice of
ducted in > 40 households in each gover- the age-old habit of gathering (or buying)
norate (> 100 in Cairo and Alexandria and consuming edible wild plants was not-
governorates). ed whenever relevant.
Food consumption and nutrition-related The proportion that the garden produce
information was obtained through a 24- contributed to the total family vegetable
hour recall of food consumed the day pre- consumption was estimated and the rea-
ceding the interview, followed by in-depth sons underlying the choice of vegetables
inter-personal interviews lasting about 1 grown noted. The presence of yard animals
hour and group interviews attended by 8– and keeping of animals (especially rabbits
12 housewives, neighbours and relatives and fowl) in urban settings, and the uses
from the same location, usually lasting for made of them, was also recorded.
1.5–2 hours. The respondent was mostly The markets and food shops were visit-
the housewife, who was responsible for ed and the degree of market dependence
feeding the family. The sample was, how- for some food items that contribute to-
ever, varied covering variations in age, sex, wards maintaining the integrity of the food
education, occupation, income and social system (e.g. dark green leafy vegetables
echelon. Information collected was not and dairy products) was assessed. The
only on types of food but also the ingredi- growing increase in dependence on the lo-
ents used in preparing it, how it was cal bread made from high extraction wheat
served, and eating habits. This also includ- produced by a wide network of state subsi-
ed management of leftovers, food associa- dized bakeries was investigated. The spe-
tions and other details about ritual foods, cial foods consumed during feasts and
taboos, variations within the family and religious fasts and rituals, both Muslim and
child feeding, and the composition of dry Christian, were noted.
uncooked meals. Information was sought Special attention was accorded to urban
on eating outside the home, including the dwellers, who represent about 45% of the
food consumed by schoolchildren during total population [12] and who are more ex-
the school day and what labourers (e.g. posed to factors that can engender signifi-
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 901
cant changes in food habits. Changes in the soil, Egypt stood out from its neighbours
geographic distribution of food consump- owing to the abundance of cereals and the
tion patterns and trends that developed over wide range of edible vegetables that could
the past half century among the people liv- be grown.
ing in Greater Cairo (which hosts nearly a The Egyptian dietary pattern became
quarter of the total population) were also structured around the flood cycle of the
noted. The foods and beverages consumed river Nile. The diet was more dependent on
outside the home in the 1950s, from fast cereals, dried legumes and preserved foods
food outlets and ambulant vendors, were when the land was under water. From ne-
compared to the type of foods and bever- cessity, Egyptians perfected a number of
ages commonly consumed outside the food preservation techniques over the ages.
home fifty years later. These included They preserved cheese, cereals, fruit, le-
shops, kiosks, and sidewalk vendors who gumes, vegetables (including dark green
sell biscuits, candy and a variety of other leafy vegetables), fish, meat, grains, aro-
food items and beverages to children out- matic seeds and condiments. Onions and
side school gates. garlic were available all year round. This
An attempt was made to identify factors know-how has survived to the present time
that enhanced or precipitated changes in and is manifest by the important place that
eating habits as well as those which helped dried legumes, cereals and dried and pre-
preserve traditions and counteract change. served foods occupy in the diet of the mod-
Special attention was accorded to varia- ern Egyptian and in the composition of
tions in the supply and demand for dark food stores in a traditional home.
green leafy vegetables and to factors influ- The difference in food habits between
encing their consumption. An overview is the north and the south of Egypt is a func-
given of some of the significant changes in tion of factors such as climate, crop com-
food consumption habits that occurred position (conditioned by the type of
during the past half century. The emer- irrigation and the agricultural cycle), the
gence of manifestations of unbalanced di- daily occupation of the inhabitants and the
etary intake was monitored, in particular, degree of exposure to and interaction with
among the more vulnerable child popula- external influences. Certain eating habits
tion. New trends and factors that under- are dictated by the extreme heat of the
mine the food system and the potential summer months where temperatures can
health implications of such trends are re- reach well over 40 °C in the south.
viewed. Food analysis tables for prepared foods
have shown that the traditional food associ-
ations and preparation methods contributed
Results
considerably to raising the nutritional value
of the foods consumed [13]. The Egyptian
A balanced heritage
food system is full of examples of the use
Certain characteristics of the Egyptian tra-
of such mixtures and of food associations
ditional food system are the outcome of the
that compensate for the essential nutrients
specific ecology of Egypt and the Nile val-
that may be deficient in 1 component of the
ley. A crop composition that remained prac-
meal. The classic example is that of the
tically unchanged for many millennia
stewed ful (fava bean) meal, which is the
allowed ample time for the development of
most popular and most widely consumed
a balanced food system over the ages. Be-
food. Taken individually, bread and beans,
cause of the fertile and easily cultivated
902 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
which are the main components, are defi- other ingredients. It is the main component
cient in a number of essential nutrients. in all meals. Egyptians eat food with bread,
However, the analysis of the prepared ful and not bread with food. Food other than
dish, as it is eaten, shows that the presence bread is colloquially referred to as ghomous
of the other ingredients has appreciably (literally, a dip): a piece of bread is broken
raised the nutritional value of the meal. The off and dipped in the ghomous. Food eaten
generous amounts of a mixture of dark with bread can be as simple as salt or a
green leafy vegetables and herbs that are mixture of salt, cumin and sesame seeds,
commonly added to a variety of dishes in an onion, white radish leaves, some aged
the last few minutes of preparation, e.g. to white cheese, or the more complete meal of
cooked colcasia (taro, Colocasia esculenta cooked vegetables or legumes. More re-
Schott) and some legumes, is another ex- cently, the habit of eating bread in the form
ample. Khodra (greens), used in a propor- of sandwiches using European style white
tion of about 1:5 of the dry weight of the bread has taken hold, in particular among
legume, is a complementary source of a children. Cheese, processed, tinned or
number of vital nutrients. Dark green herbs cooked meats, fried potatoes, pickled aub-
and leafy vegetables, eaten daily either ergines, eggs, and even bananas are some
fresh or cooked, are an essential ingredient of the fillings that are used. For those who
in the Egyptian diet, and are associated with can afford them, the hamburger, pizza or
many dishes (Table 1). Dried chickpeas, the generously garnished composite mod-
sesame and fenugreek are some food items ern sandwich are becoming popular.
that can raise the nutritional quality of the Cereals and legumes constitute the
foods they are associated with. The en- mainstay of the diet in the population as a
hancement of the nutritional value of foods whole and are the main sources of calories
through germination (e.g. fava beans), and proteins [14,15]. The nutritional bal-
sprouting (e.g. fenugreek), or fermentation ance of a diet based on a cereal/legume mix
is still commonly practised. The latter is is maintained through the regular intake of
used in the making of kishk, sun-dried balls small amounts of white cheese or other
of wheat fermented in sour milk. dairy products, fresh dark green leafy veg-
Maintaining the nutritional quality of the etables, and less regularly eggs, poultry and
Egyptian food system depended not only birds, fish and occasionally red meat. Fresh
on the types of foods eaten, but also on the and cooked vegetables and fruits complete
way they were consumed, on food associ- the system. For the average Egyptian, fruit
ations, on methods of food preparation and consumption is not meal-related and is usu-
conservation, and also on the quantities ally dependent on seasonal availability. This
consumed. The food groups that are con- was not a source of worry for the first gen-
sidered the pillars of the traditional Egyp- eration of Egyptian nutritionists as long as
tian food system include cereals the essential nutrients provided by a daily
(unrefined), legumes, dark green leafy veg- fruit intake were supplied from other
etables, other vegetables and fruits, cheese, sources, also consumed fresh. In this re-
oils and white and red meat. spect, the tomato was sometimes referred
to as the poor man’s apple since it was rich
Basic features of the Egyptian diet in vitamin C and was available all year
Bread, the staple food, enjoys a very special round (A. Hassan, personal communica-
place in the diet. It is still made from high tion).
extraction wheat flour or wheat mixed with
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 903
Table 1 Dark green leafy vegetables commonly consumed by Egyptians
Vegetable Mode consumed
Common name Latin name Raw Dried Cooked
Aromatic herbs
Parsley Petroselinum sativum + – +
Coriander Coriandrum sativum + + +
Dill Anethum graveolens + – +
Chervil (regl el ghorab) Carum amioides + – –
Mint Mentha sativa + + –
Green leafy vegetables
Romaine lettuce Lactuca sativa + – +
Garden rocket (gargeer) Eruca sativa + – –
Jew’s mallow (molokheya) Corchorus olitorius – + +
Spinach Spinacea oleracea – – +
Mallow (khobeza) Malva parviflora – – +
Swiss chard (sal’) Beta vulgaris – + +
Purselane (regla) Portulaca oleracea – – +
Green leaves of roots/bulbs
White radish Raphanus sativa + – –
Turnip Brassica rapa – – +
Onion (green onion) Allium cepa + – +
Egyptian leek Allium kurrat + – +
Celery Apium graveolens – – +
Leaves of edible plantsa
Garden pea Pisum sativa – – +
Cowpea Vigna sinensis – – +
Egyptian bean (lablab or gashrangeig) Dolichos lablab – – +
Okra Hibiscus esculentus – – +
Edible leaves of fruits
Vine Vitis vinifera – – +
Edible wild plantsa
Hare’s lettuce (go’deid) Sonchus oleraceus + – –
Rampion (serees) Campanula rapunculus + – –
Prickly goldenfleece (galawein) Urospermum picroides + – –
Sheep sorrel (hommeid) Rumex acetosella – – +
Wild lettuce (lebbeen) Lactuca virosa + – –
Purselane (regla) Portulaca oleracea + – +
Mallow (khobbeza) Malva parviflora – – +
Sprouted legumes
Fenugreek sprouts Trigonella fœnum-græcum + – –
aCollected by the peasants from the fields (of clover, wheat and beans) and canal banks, these
wild weeds as well as the tender leaves of edible crops are usually gathered for personal
consumption. Common local names are given in italics.
904 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
Although there is no special penchant dry biscuits of all shapes that are salty or
for excessive salt seasoning, Egyptians lightly sweetened, and containing a mixture
tend to consume more salt during the sum- of aromatic or oily seeds such as fennel,
mer months through eating old white aniseed, caraway, sesame or linseed are
cheese, olives, pickled vegetables, and salt- widely consumed. Dried fruit pastes or
ed fish. The last is a regional habit popular cooked honey are the traditional sweet fill-
in the very hot southern governorates. Salt, ings for some of these biscuits. For the av-
cumin and coriander seeds have been the erage Egyptian, sweetmeats and desserts
main seasoning agents since ancient times. are not a regularly consumed food item but
Till now, black pepper is absent from many are more related to religious feasts and var-
of the kitchen shelves of the more isolated ious other celebrations. For the Prophet
southern villages of the Nile valley. Egyp- Muhammad’s birthday, a wide variety of
tians are not lovers of hot chilli peppers like sugar-based sweetmeats and colourfully
their western and southern neighbours. decorated sugar dolls and knights on horse-
They tend to follow the Eastern Mediterra- back are produced. This tradition, particu-
nean countries in this respect. Vinegar and lar to Egypt, is a legacy of the Fatimid
limes have been extensively used since an- period (969–1171 AD) when the crafts-
cient times [16] in food preparation and in manship for cane sugar artistry flourished.
particular in the making of pickled vegeta- The heritage of ritual food habits and
bles and olives. culinary traditions of the Copts [11] repre-
Traditionally, the diet is low in saturated sents an unbroken continuity with ancient
fats, and oil is commonly used for cooking habits. The foods consumed during the
rather than butter. Deep-frying is an im- meatless fasts that are observed for about
ported habit that is less than 200 years old. two thirds of the year are derived with ce-
At the present time, it is used in the cooking reals, legumes, vegetables, green leafy veg-
of the very popular fried fava bean patties etables and fruits. Given their pre-Christian
known as ta’ameyya or falafel, a relatively origin, these foods are eaten by all Egyp-
new introduction. Recipes tend to be sim- tians, though to a lesser extent by those ur-
ple and straightforward, and ingredients are ban dwellers who have adopted imported
usually mixed raw and cooked in the oven food habits.
in earthenware pots or boiled. Slow cook- The Muslim fasting month of Ramadan
ing overnight is used for stewing cereals is associated with a set of traditions related
and dried legumes such as wheat and fava to food that make many people eat a richer
beans. Steaming continues to be done in diet during the non-fasting hours that ex-
specially designed pots, metal now replac- tend from sundown to sunrise. Consump-
ing the original earthenware utensils. Birds tion of dried fruits, all kinds of nuts,
and fish are often grilled. Pigeon and quail oriental desserts rich in fat and sugar, as
can also be eaten stuffed with fereek well as a daily cooked meal for breaking the
(rubbed green wheat) or rice. Larger birds fast often adds up to a higher calorie con-
such as poultry, geese and ducks are usual- tent than the usual, non-fasting, daily in-
ly boiled. The traditional method of searing take. Meat and poultry consumption is
the boiled bird or meat for a few minutes in increased as families tend to serve meat
a very hot traditional oven has now been each day even if they did not usually eat
replaced by frying in oil or clarified butter. that much meat. The government makes
The Egyptian is not traditionally renowned special provision for the nationwide in-
for having a sweet tooth. A wide variety of crease in food consumption during Ra-
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 905
madan. Preparations for this month involve
Table 2 Some traditional non-alcoholic
the import of large quantities of nuts and
beverages still consumed in Egypt
dried fruits, to which are added the local
dates and peanuts. However, alongside this Traditional beverages
rich food, 2 traditional food items appear
Cold infusions
daily on nearly every table in rich and poor
Red sorrel (karkadeh) Hibiscus sabdariffa
homes alike. These are ful, stewed fava
Tamarind
beans, and all kinds of dark green leafy
Carob (kharrub)
vegetables (Table 1).
Licorice drink (erq’soos)
A wide variety of drinks and beverages
Dom Hyphaene thebaica
are an important component of the food
Hot infusions
system as they are consumed in consider-
Tea (black)
able amounts during the hot summer
Coffee
months. Many of the traditional drinks
Fenugreek (whole)
based on natural products (e.g. karkadeh Ginger (ground)
and fenugreek) are known to have a benefi- Hibiscus (karkadeh)
cial effect on health (Table 2). Their re- Cinnamon (ground)
placement by commercially produced Mint leaves
carbonated drinks, other soft drinks and Cumin seeds
fruit nectars entailed a significant increase Fennel seeds
in the daily sugar intake apart from depriv- Caraway seeds
Aniseed
ing the body of the health benefits of the
Barley
natural beverages. The habit of consuming
small glasses of sweetened black tea is also Juice (freshly pressed)
popular. It is an important source of ready Sugar cane, pomegranate and other fruits in
season
calories for workers during the long inter-
val between the waking up drink and the Composite recipes
next meal. While tea drinking can be la- Moghat (traditionally given to parturient
belled a national habit, coffee drinking is mothers, with ground wild pomegranate root
as the basic ingredient)
less popular. Generally speaking, coffee is
Sahlab (a milk drink made with ground orchis
rarely consumed among the fellaheen and
root as the main ingredient) Orchis latifolia
manual labourers; it is more common in ur-
Sherbets and syrups (now mostly commercialized)
ban populations. The serving of unsweet-
Rose petal syrup
ened coffee at a wake is, however, a
Violet petal syrup
traditional custom observed by most Egyp-
Fruit based syrups, made from juice of
tians.
mulberries, pomegranate, strawberries, etc.
It may be opportune to comment on the
Syrups made from concentrated extracts of
way that meat is perceived by Egyptians
tamarind and carob
and its place in the diet. With plenty of fish
Reconstituted sun-dried sheets of fruit pulp
in the river and poultry and pigeons in the
Apricot (qamareddin)
back yard, red meat is not a regular element
Mango
in the diet of the fellaheen, or for the aver-
Other (salted)
age Egyptian with a limited income, or for
Pickling water of turnips
the Copts who observe a meatless fast for
Seasoned water of boiled chickpeas
more than half the year. Meat is more com-
monly consumed on Fridays (the religious
906 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
day of rest for Muslims) and is eaten during often cooked and served apart. Fruit may
feasts or for meals celebrating special oc- or may not be eaten at the main meal. It is
casions. Well-to-do households that can af- more usual to end the meal with a glass of
ford it tend to consume high amounts of tea or other hot infusion (Table 2).
animal protein. Meat tends to be regarded For the majority of the fellaheen, manu-
as a status symbol or a prestige item for al labourers and artisans, the midday meal
households with limited incomes. Never- consumed at the workplace is a smaller and
theless, the ancient habit of serving several usually uncooked meal made up essentially
meat dishes when giving a banquet [6] con- of bread eaten with cheese and/or fava
tinues to be the practice. Today, families beans, onions and green leafy vegetables,
with modest incomes still make a point of often accompanied by tomatoes, pickled
serving 2 or more meat dishes when enter- aubergines, or other pickled vegetables.
taining guests. Till about 2 decades ago, the main
cooked meal for millions of public sector
Meals and meal patterns employees, who worked 6 days a week
The first meal of the day is small. It is made from 08.00 to 14.00, was at around 15.00.
up of a drink taken alone or accompanied With the new 5-day working week and
by a piece of bread, a dry biscuit, a bowl of longer working hours adopted by the
stewed whole wheat, or just some broken growing private sector as well as some of
dry bread soaked in milk or other hot infu- the government institutions and services,
sion. Children usually have a glass of milk there has been a shift of several hours in
or tea with milk and a sandwich. What the the timing of the main cooked meal. The
average Egyptian refers to as “breakfast” is presence, in this group, of relatively high
what is eaten between the waking up drink salaried private sector and banking employ-
and the main cooked meal. It is a between- ees who already lead a modern lifestyle
meal snack of varying importance, from a makes this group a prime consumer of the
few dry biscuits to a cheese sandwich or modern type of fast foods (Table 3). The
more often a ful or ta’ameyya (fried bean main meal is consumed upon return home,
patty) sandwich or a pastry. i.e. around 18.00 hours. This late timing
The Friday breakfast, eaten at leisure brings it nearer to the traditional timing of
and en famille, is a more generous meal. the main cooked meal eaten by peasants
Stewed beans, eggs, green leafy vegeta- and labourers at the end of their long work-
bles, onions, tahina (sesame paste) salad, ing day. However, it appears that the 2 eat-
ta’ameyya, pickled vegetables, cheese, ing patterns, the old and the new,
stewed whole wheat (belila) or home made sometimes co-exist. Those who have eaten
noodles, butter or cream, honey, molasses at 18.00 can again eat a full cooked meal if
and all kinds of jams are some of the food invited out. A rapidly growing demand has
items that can appear on a Friday breakfast been observed among urban populations
table. with long working hours for the modern
The main cooked meal is usually made take-away type of meals commonly con-
up of bread eaten with cooked vegetables sumed at the workplace. For them, this is a
or legumes, with pickles and green leafy between-meal snack and not counted as a
vegetables or a finely chopped mixed salad meal. Many of them tide over this period
on the side. Meat, for those who can afford with only beverages and a pastry.
it, is cooked with the vegetables and less
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 907
With the growing industrialization of the pattern. Some work 8-hour shifts with no
country, meal times for industrial workers lunch break while others can work for a
have also been changing, with no unified long day with a 1-hour midday break. For
Table 3 Changes in availability of fast food from 1950 to 2000 in different
outlets in traditional and western style neighbourhoods
Type of food Neighbourhood
Traditional Western
1950 2000 1950 2000
Fast food outlet
Hamburger meal – – – +
Pizza – – – +
Fried chicken – – – +
Grilled chicken – – – +
Cafeteria style shops – – ± ±
Grilled pigeons ± + + +
Grilled kebab and kofta + + + +
Ful (fava beans) and ta’ameyya
(fried bean patty) meal + + + ±
Koshari (rice and lentil dish) + + – ±
Veal head, offal and rice sausage + + – –
Fixed stand/counter
Feteera, pastry with a variety of fillings + + – –
Fried fish + + + +
Grilled fish + + + +
Grilled beef or chicken shawerma
sandwiches – – ± +
Western style panini sandwiches with
composite filling – – – +
Simple sandwiches + + + ±
Regheef el-hawawshi, minced meat in
flat local bread + ± – –
Mobile cart or stand
Koshari, rice and lentil dish + + – –
Ful and ful sandwiches + + + +
Shamsia bread and old white cheese + ± – –
Ambulant vendor
Borek, pastry with white cheese filling + + + –
Semeet, bread rings with rumi (hard)
cheese or dokkab + + + +
Veal head, offal and rice sausage + ± – –
+ available, ± occasionally available, – not available.
aTraditional Upper Egyptian bread.
bMixture of salt with ground cumin and sesame seeds and other aromatic
ingredients.
908 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
Egyptians this is not a main meal. This pat- For those whose main meal is con-
tern is similar to the traditional pattern of a sumed at lunch time, the evening meal is
midday meal consumed at the workplace lighter and usually made up of what is re-
and the main cooked meal eaten upon re- ferred to locally as dry foods (i.e. without a
turn home in the evening. The group that sauce). Leftovers from lunch are often
works a straight 8-hour shift without a served again in the evening. Some of the
break will return home for the main meal in common evening meal components apart
a pattern similar to that of public sector from bread include fava beans and lentil
employees, except that they have no access based dishes, cheese, dark green leafy veg-
to the pre-main meal snack. etables, pickled vegetables, tomatoes and
There is a rapidly growing number of cucumbers. Melon or watermelon eaten
working women at all social levels. Chil- with white cheese and bread make up a
dren who return from school at an earlier popular summer menu. For children, a
time than their working parents do not al- favourite nutritious evening meal is bread
ways have a meal upon their arrival home. dipped in a molasses-tahina mix. Tinned
They may have to wait for the return of foods such as mackerel, sardines, tuna,
their parents to eat with them. Parents do beef, processed beef or poultry can be eat-
not seem to mind that their children tide en with bread or made into sandwiches
this long period between breakfast and the with a salad or pickled vegetables on the
main meal with a sandwich, a soft drink, side. Few households serve a second
candy, or with any of the rapidly growing cooked meal at night. This is usually re-
array of junk foods [17]. This means that served for the instances when guests are
the peak hunger period for the growing invited.
child is appeased with foods of doubtful A food habit that has survived till today
nutritional quality, which are often eaten is that of nibbling different snacks. Nib-
under little control or supervision. As a bling is favoured following the evening
consequence, the children are poor eaters meal, and snacks are more often consumed
when they sit at the main meal [18,19]. The outdoors during the long summer evenings.
ill-effects on the health of children of a cy- With television watching, nibbling (and
cle of irregular mealtimes and nutritionally food consumption in general) can continue
imbalanced food intake may be further late into the night. Traditional snack foods
complicated by long hours of television (Table 4) comprise a variety of different
watching accompanied by more consump- food items and continue to be enjoyed by
tion of junk foods, soft drinks, candy and the rich and the poor of all ages. Some of
sweets [20]. While the rise in the incidence them are highly nutritious and can repre-
of iron deficiency anaemia and obesity sent a non-negligible supplement to the dai-
among children has already been reported ly nutrient intake of a child. Their
[21], no investigation has yet been under- replacement by sweets, candy and junk
taken of the set of symptoms and com- foods is much less advantageous to the
plaints that are commonly reported these food system.
days by the mothers themselves. These
symptoms include constipation, irritability The onset of change
and recurrent headaches that are not related In the mid 20th century, the basic elements
to any sickness. of the traditional Egyptian diet were for the
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 909
larger part still preserved, more so among
Table 4 Some traditional snack food
the rural communities and the Copts whose consumed by Egyptians
diet and ritual foods are little affected by
change. The legacy of the succession of Traditional snack food
external influences leading to changes in
Legumes
food habits was more evident in the larger
Green chick peas (malana)
urban communities and the coastal towns.
Boiled chick peas
The higher social classes were much more Roasted chick peas
readily influenced by the food habits of the Green fava beans (ful herati)
foreign ruling elite. Most of the influence Roasted germinated fava beans (ful meqeli)
was eastern Mediterranean and, to a lesser Germinated fava beans
extent, European, North African and Arab Lupine (soaked and boiled)
(Arabian peninsula). The simply prepared Sprouted fenugreek seeds
Roasted peanuts
foods of the traditional diet gave place to
elaborate dishes requiring complex, lengthy Vegetables
preparation and generous amounts of clari- Egyptian red carrots
Romaine lettuce
fied butter, with less attention to the con-
sumption of fresh vegetables. Deep-frying, Tubers (habb el aziz)
the use of rich, composite sauces and the Tiger nuts
growing popularity of rich sweetmeats and Grains and seeds
desserts containing nuts and soaked in Popped corn (maize)
heavy syrup considerably raised the overall Grilled fresh corn on the cob
Roasted wheat grains
intake of sugars and saturated fats. White
Roasted pumpkin seeds
bread, in many instances, replaced the tra-
Roasted cucurbit seeds
ditional high extraction local bread. Many
Roasted melon seeds
of the nutritionally valuable traditional food
Fruits
associations were ignored. For people liv-
Christ thorn (nabq)
ing in poverty or those with limited in-
Jojoba (ennab)
comes, changes were more related to the
Golden berry (harankash)
need to cope with rising food costs and to
Dom palm fruit
making nutritionally correct choices. By Sycamore fig
necessity, they depended on the cheaper Prickly pear
traditional foods and the subsidized local Other
bread. For this group, the continued con- Sugar cane
sumption of fresh dark green leafy and oth-
er vegetables was a nutritionally valuable
traditional habit.
A series of changes in the food habits prior preparation or guidance on how to
and lifestyles of the rural populations fol- deal with new situations and new food
lowed the acceleration of rural develop- products.
ment programmes (and modernization) Two major developments directly influ-
which gradually ended the traditional isola- enced changes in food habits. The first was
tion of the fellaheen. Rural populations be- the creation of a nationwide network of
came exposed to a host of unfamiliar cooperative societies, game’eyya ta’awo-
external influences and lifestyles with little neyya, (a successor to the food rationing
910 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
system introduced during the Second The last decades of the twentieth centu-
World War) to serve as distribution outlets ry witnessed a further acceleration of
for subsidized or price-controlled foods. change in the form and substance of the
These cooperatives were instrumental in Egyptian diet. Change was accelerated by
introducing rice, a hitherto unfamiliar food the liberalization of the market and the
for the southerners who traditionally con- “open door” economic policy, which gave
sumed fereek (rubbed green wheat) in- rise to indiscriminate and uncontrolled con-
stead. Equipped with cold storage facilities sumer desire for imported commodities
for the distribution of frozen foods, the co- and western lifestyles [20]. The spread of
operative societies were the end point in a this trend was facilitated by the rapid social
cold chain for the distribution of imported mobility [23] that followed in the wake of
frozen foods. Subsidized imported meat the 1952 revolution and the access by mid-
and chicken were important supplements dle income and low income groups of the
to the food system during the economically population to the much higher earnings of
difficult decades after the end of the war. family members working in the Gulf coun-
The Egyptians, who always preferred to tries. This increase in the purchasing pow-
eat freshly slaughtered meat or poultry, er of Egyptians was also a result of the
were very slow in accepting frozen meats. gradual increase in the per capita gross do-
The same cold chain served to distribute mestic product over the same period
cheap frozen fish from Lake Nasser, which [24,25].
reached the tables of a growing number of Government efforts to extend the public
Egyptians, adding a precious source of broadcasting (radio and television) service
high quality protein. Cooperatives also to all the inhabited areas in the country
served as outlets for the sale of price- brought inside homes images of unfamiliar
controlled chicken and eggs produced by modern lifestyles. Aggressive marketing
the growing numbers of state-backed com- campaigns for the modern foods that ac-
mercial chicken farms. All these develop- companied the new lifestyles found their
ments led to an increase in the consumption mark in the targeted population of youth
of animal protein in groups of the urban and children. The phenomenal popularity of
population with modest incomes. junk foods among children does not seem
The second development was the estab- to be confined by any socioeconomic or
lishment of a network of mechanized bak- geographic barriers, making this group a
eries producing mainly the high extraction prime consumer of junk foods. Families in
local bread, and to a lesser extent, a thin flat all walks of life were overtaken by the de-
white bread known as shami bread. These mands of the unfamiliar lifestyles and pat-
bakeries, using subsidized flour and selling terns, in particular, the longer working
a price-controlled loaf, produced bread that hours and the inevitable change in the eat-
was considerably cheaper for the fellaheen ing pattern. Deprived from the support tra-
than home production. Home baking be- ditionally enjoyed as members of an
came reserved for special occasions, feasts extended family, parents in the modern nu-
and celebrations. The younger generations, clear families found themselves ill equipped
both rural and urban, are turning more to and unable to cope. Problems were felt
white bread, preferring the European-style more where both parents worked or in
loaf. They find it more suited to their sand- families with a woman as head of house-
wiches [22]. old. The ability to cope was further cur-
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 911
tailed by the low purchasing power of low- fected those food elements, such as high
income families. extraction bread, legumes, fresh dark green
leafy vegetables, and other vegetables and
fruits, which are the pillars of the system
Discussion
and which have high nutritional value.
It became evident towards the end of
The variety and abundance of food in
the last century that the healthy diet of
Egypt over the ages preserved it from
Egyptians, developed over thousands of
change [3]. The food balance of the coun-
years and which had till then retained its
try started to break down in the middle of
essential features, was progressively losing
the 20th century, which marked the start of
some of its essential elements and rapidly
food importation and the beginning of a
disintegrating. The rapidity of change in
gradual decline in the tradition of food self-
food habits accompanied equally rapid so-
sufficiency [4]. The demands of an in-
cial and economic transformations. The
creasing population that were not paralleled
changes were accelerated in the 1970s with
by an increase in the total inhabited and cul-
the liberalization of the economy. It is ap-
tivated surface area widely surpassed local
parent that people at all levels of society
food production. In 1947, there were 19
were overwhelmed by the rapidity of the
million inhabitants living on 4% of the total
change.
surface area of Egypt. This rose to almost
The change was quicker to take hold in
66 million living on about 5.3% of the sur-
the urban populations, which represent
face area in the year 2000. It took several
nearly half the total population of the coun-
centuries for the Egyptian diet to develop
try. Not having access to nutrition guid-
and take root. The Egyptians who were
ance, they adopted ready solutions that
well settled in their habits were not all able
were not backed by nutritional awareness
to adjust to or cope with the rapid changes
or discrimination. These new choices were
that occurred during the past half century,
made easy by a higher purchasing power
and in particular the past 2 decades. Those
and a strong desire for modernization. The
changes were in the greater part related to
choices were also influenced by aggressive
the modernization and industrialization of
advertising campaigns and the easy acces-
the country. The increase in the number of
sibility of junk food, candy and soft drinks.
women working outside the home, women
It is disturbing to observe the way
heads of household and nuclear families did
present day Egyptians are trading their di-
not make matters easier. Little help or guid-
etary heritage for unbalanced, unhealthy
ance was offered on how to adapt to a
foods. Much time and effort could be spent
changed pattern of life or on how to make
on a fine analysis of the causal web of fac-
the right choices to ensure a balanced daily
tors that makes the Egyptian lose grip on
food intake.
the traditional diet. It would be more cost-
The traditional diet of Egyptians is made
effective to investigate why the new trends
up of basic elements regarded as the essen-
are taking hold, to find ways to protect
tial components of the system. Any chang-
good food habits and to identify the inter-
es in food habits strong enough to disrupt
ventions or the means which would pre-
the balance of the system without being
serve the integrity of a balanced food
compensated for will, unless corrected,
system.
lead to malnutrition and ill health. It would
be a cause for concern if the imbalance af-
912 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
One of the important approaches in a of the Egyptian food system. This practical
multi-pronged strategy to improve the nu- approach would need to highlight those
tritional quality of the Egyptian diet would foods that are better adapted to the de-
be the creation of nutritional awareness and mands of modern life and provide informa-
developing the capacity for nutritional dis- tion on meal composition and on ways of
crimination among the Egyptian public. reducing food preparation time. It should
This could be achieved through the mobili- draw attention to foods that combine low
zation of well-informed and coordinated cost with high nutritional value. Guidance
support from those involved in monitoring in managing child feeding will need to be
the nutrition situation and in formulating based on the results of a comprehensive
policy and interventions that could preserve evaluation of the situation and the problems
the nutritional quality of the traditional food that children face.
system. Their task would be to promote an All approaches in a strategy to protect
evolution of the food system and enable it the traditional system will need to be adapt-
to cope with and accommodate the chang- ed to the demands and requirements of all
es that have occurred. The information socioeconomic strata of the population in
generated could become instrumental in the all situations and settings, whether wealthy
creation of an enlightened consumer and a or deprived, rural or urban.
consumer society that would have the The shortcuts and easy solutions that
power to influence and shape the food mar- offer themselves, such as the consumption
ket. of the new fast foods, may solve immediate
A second approach, complementary to problems and satisfy immediate needs in
the above, would be to support and guide the short term. In the long term, however,
families in adjusting meal patterns and ignoring the needs of children or compla-
composition to cope with new lifestyles cency about the types of food that they
and changes in daily routine. No carefully consume will certainly give rise to malnu-
planned adjustment has been made to ac- trition. Iron deficiency anaemia, obesity
commodate the long working hours which and undernourishment are becoming more
have been in operation now for nearly 2 and more common among Egyptian chil-
decades. Egyptian families were not ade- dren [21]. Correcting the dietary deficien-
quately prepared to cope with the problems cies alone will not solve the problem. Help
that the longer working day created. Shift- and guidance needs to be provided to reor-
ing the main cooked meal to late afternoon ganize family meals in a way that satisfies
has been the solution adopted by most fam- the nutritional needs of children.
ilies. The problem of no provision for a The growing trends for increased con-
meal on children’s return from school, sumption of fast food, junk food, sweets
commonly the case in nuclear families and candy instead of the more wholesome
where both parents are working, and in the traditional snacks, and for consuming soft
absence of the support of the traditional drinks with a high calorie content instead of
extended family, has not been properly in- the traditional natural beverages are viewed
vestigated. as a social and a market phenomenon.
A third approach would be to help fam- These products have become popular with
ilies regain confidence in traditional foods all ages and all social groups. Aggressive
and in the possibility of eating modern marketing campaigns are finding fertile,
meals without losing the essential features ground especially among the younger gen-
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 913
erations. The cost on health of the spread national campaign for promotion of change
of these habits is high because of the higher is decisive enough, the market will follow
calorie and fat intake, lower intake of vita- because this is where the profit lies. Once
mins and minerals, unaccustomed increase the market responds and reflects the de-
in the daily intake of animal proteins, and sires of enlightened, discriminating con-
most importantly exposure to toxic sub- sumers, they will then become its strongest
stances and mutagens identified in some ally when it promotes modified, healthier
fast food meals and in junk foods that often products.
contain artificial colours, flavours, and uni-
dentified food additives [26]
Conclusion
What the Egyptians do not know is that
the traditional diet that they are abandoning
Egypt has a valuable heritage of a well-
is what the western world is now seeking
established and balanced diet which per-
to eat [2,27]. Also, from a nutritional point
sisted practically unchanged for the best
of view, the uncontrolled consumption of
part of 5000 years. This valuable indige-
these modern foods does not represent
nous food system must be protected and
progress, but a regression. The intellectual
compensated for losses suffered through
impulse to blame market forces is mis-
the adoption of new food habits. A number
placed. The market is only a reflection of
of appropriate interventions need to be
the desires of the people at a given point in
identified suited to the current circum-
time and space. Industry makes extensive
stances for each sector of the population.
studies into the behavioural patterns of the
These interventions should be able to pro-
people in order to be able to satisfy them
tect the essential features of the traditional
and, in turn, to guarantee their own gains.
system and offer options to compensate
It is the duty of nutritionists to work on a
for deficiencies. An enlightened and dis-
medium/long-term basis to shape those de-
criminating consumer can shape the mar-
sires. This would be instrumental in en-
ket and reverse the ill effects of the trend
couraging the government to develop a
towards excessive consumption of fast
policy to shape the market according to the
foods and other unhealthy foods. Reorgani-
new desires that we have helped to form.
zation and adjustment of mealtimes and
The case of a soft drink company respond-
meal composition to meet the demands of
ing to the desire to consume less sugar by
altered lifestyles would be a valuable back-
producing a diet version of their cola, and
up to the discriminating consumer. Nutri-
removing the stimulating substance in the
tionists need to formulate a multi-pronged
drink and marketing a decaffeinated ver-
national policy for teaching nutritional dis-
sion are examples of response to the de-
crimination, not only nutritional education,
sires of the discriminating client.
so as to enable people to differentiate the
Interdictions do not give rise to results.
good from the bad, in relation to “me” and
When nutritionists succeed in shaping hab-
“my needs”. This is an exercise that needs
its by the creation of a discriminating con-
to start with the younger generation in par-
sumer, a strong consumer society will in
ticular in schools.
turn be able to influence the market. If a
914 La Revue de Santé de la Méditerranée orientale, Vol. 10, No 6, 2004
Acknowledgement life-long research contributed to a better
understanding of the traditional wisdom
This work is dedicated to the memory of that guided the evolution of Egyptian food
my mentor and teacher, Professor Ali Has- habits across the ages.
san, the father of nutrition in Egypt. His
References
1. Bottéro J. Les sources. In: La plus vieille 10. Lane EW. Domestic life. In: Manners and
cuisine du monde [The oldest cuisine of customs of the modern Egyptians. The
the world]. Paris, Editions Louis Hague, East-West Publications, 1989:
Audibert, 2002:29–61. 137–59.
2. Fricker J, Laty D. Le régime crétois [The 11. Wassef CW. Pratiques rituelles et
Cretan diet]. Paris, Hachette Livre, 2000. alimentaires des coptes [Ritual and di-
etary practices of the Copts]. Cairo,
3. Hamdan G. Al-zera’a al-misriya men al-
Institut français d’archéologie orientale,
khareeta ila al-takhteet [Egyptian agri-
1971:323–402.
culture from the map to the plan]. In:
Shakhseyyet misr, part III. Aalam Al- 12. Bureau for Global Health. USAID country
Koutob 1984:176–350. health statistical report, Egypt. Washing-
ton DC, Population, Health and Nutrition
4. Hamdan G. Khareetet al-ektessaad al-
Information Project (PHNI), 2002.
misri [Map of the Egyptian economy]. In:
Shakhseyyet misr, Part III. Cairo, Aalam 13. Food composition tables for Egypt.
Al-Koutob, 1984:52–78. Cairo, Nutrition Institute, 1996.
5. Hamdan G. Sokkan misr, bay’n al- 14. Henein NH. La vie matérielle. In: Mari
moushkela wal halle [Egypt’s popula- Guirguis, village de haute Egypte [Mari
tion: the problem and the solution]. In: Guirguis, a village of Upper Egypt].
Shakhseyyet misr, part IV. Cairo, Aalam Cairo, Institut français d’archéologie
Al-Koutob, 1984:131–250. orientale, 1988:109–77.
6. Wilson H. Egyptian food and drink. 15. Ayrout HH. Le corps du fellah. In: Mœurs
Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, Shire Pub- et coutumes des fellahs [Manners and
lications, 1988:11–58. habits of the (Egyptian) peasant]. Paris,
Payot, 1938:89–109.
7. Manniche L. An ancient Egyptian herbal.
London, British Museum Press, 1999. 16. Apicius (300 AD). L’Art culinaire [The cu-
linary art], 2nd ed. Translated André J.
8. Strouhal E. Life of the Ancient Egyptians.
Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 2002:115.
Cairo, American University in Cairo
Press, 1996:125–135. 17. Wahba SA et al. Breakfast skipping and
dietary adequacy of primary school chil-
9. De Fenoyl R, trans. L’alimentation des
dren in Cairo. Journal of Arab child,
habitants actuels de l’Egypte [The food
1998, 99(4):583–99.
of the present inhabitants of Egypt]. In: La
médicine des Egyptiens par Prosper 18. Osman M, Khattab M. The situation of
Alpin 1581–1584 [The medicine of the Egyptian children and women: a rights-
Egyptians by Prosper Alpin, 1581– based analysis. Cairo, United Nations
1584]. Cairo, Institut français d’archéo- Children’s Fund, 2002.
logie orientale, 1980:59–85.
Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, Vol. 10, No. 6, 2004 915
19. El-Tawila S et al. Transitions to adul- American University in Cairo Press,
thood:a national survey of Egyptian ado- 2000:7–30.
lescents. Cairo, Population Council,
24. Egypt human development report 2000/
1999.
2001. Cairo, United Nations Develop-
20. Amin G. Westernization. In: Whatever ment Programme & Institute of National
happened to the Egyptians? Cairo, Planning, 2001.
American University in Cairo Press,
25. The fifth national social and economic
2000:45–54.
five-year plan (2002–2007), and its first
21. El Zanaty F, Khallaf N. Ensuring the year plan. Cairo, Ministry of National
physical well-being of children: the right Planning, Arab Republic of Egypt, 2002.
to survival and good health. In: The situa-
26. Besançon P et al. Mediterranean diet
tion of Egyptian children and women: a
and health: current news and prospects.
rights based analysis. Cairo, United Na-
Paris, John Libbey Eurotext, 2001
tions Children’s Fund, 2002.
27. Besançon P. Health benefits of the Medi-
22. Ibrahim NI. Development of a food con-
terranean consumption model. In:
sumption monitoring system for Egypt.
Besançon P et al., eds. Mediterranean
Cairo, Ministry of Agriculture and Land
diet and health: current news and pros-
Reclamation, 2003 (4th Technical Re-
pects. Paris, John Libbey Eurotext,
port).
2001:3–50.
23. Amin G. Social mobility. In: Whatever
happened to the Egyptians? Cairo,
