Halawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Journal of Ethnic Foods

ORIGINAL ARTICLE Open Access
Influence of the traditional food culture of Ancient Egypt on the transition of cuisine and food culture of contemporary Egypt
Abdelhadi Halawa1*
Abstract
Because of the largely arid desert landscape of Egypt, for millennia, Egyptians have been closely connected to living alongside the narrow fertile banks of the Nile River. Annually, melting snow cascading from the mountains in the highlands of the south triggers the Nile River to flood on its journey northbound toward Egypt. As the flood water recedes, it leaves in its wake a rich layer of fertile, volcanic dark soil deposits. The Egyptians mainly rely on this annual natural event to grow various staple food crops, including emmer wheat for making bread, vegetables for cooking molokhia, fruits, and legumes for making koshary. Further, the Nile River provides a source of drinking water, fishing, and raising livestock for meat and dairy products for making halloumi and kariesh cheeses. Ancient Egyptians devoted a sizable portion of Pharaonic history to food, both as nourishment and for the preparation for the mythical religious experience on the journey into eternal life. Food played an essential role in performing religious rites, mummification, coronation and wedding banquets, burial ceremonies, and particularly in preparation for entering eternal life in the afterlife. Because the ancient Egyptians meticulously kept descriptive records, there is a considerable body of archaeological evidence and hieroglyphic accounts regarding ancient Egyptian tangible food history and culture. However, ancient Egyptian food culture has not received adequate scholarly investigations as did the Pharaohs, Pyramids, and mummies. This article aims to examine the under-researched area of the influence of the traditional food culture of Ancient Egypt on the transition of the cuisine and food culture of contemporary Egypt, and how the Pharaohs employed food to achieve longevity during their life and prepare for successful admission into their afterlife. Three factors have contributed to the development and continuation of the 5000-year Egyptian food culture. First, the existence of the Nile River provides reliable, rich silted soil for growing various staple crops. Second, the annual inundation of the Nile River transports fresh layers of silt-rich fertile soil, which provides stable agriculture and supports cultivating various food crops and raising livestock. Third, as a result, of the first two factors, Egypt has been experiencing abundantly diverse staple food sources for millennia.
Keywords Ancient Egypt's foodways, Pharaohs, Egypt, Book of the dead, Food for the afterlife, Nile River, Genesis of
Egyptian gastronomy
Introduction
Egypt is a country situated in northeastern Africa bordered by the Mediterranean Sea from the north and the Red Sea from the East. Egypt's millennial history
*Correspondence:
Abdelhadi Halawa dates back to the period of the Pharaohs and the Great ahalawa@millersville.edu Pyramids of Giza. This strategic geographical location
1 Millersville University, Millersville, PA, USA links northeast Africa to the Middle East, making Egypt

permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory

licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
Halawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 2 of 13
readily accessible to the African, European, and Asian were different diets for different age groups. An isotopic continents connected through the Suez Canal waterway. analysis found chemical differences inferred from diets
For millennia, this strategic location together with the consumed by children and adults. In particular, researchfertile land of the delta of the Nile River valley provided ers associated these differences with the consumption of sustained agriculture for growing grain crops, rich green milk or millet porridge during infancy and childhood.
vegetation, and raising animals and fowls to provide Founded on the results from the isotopic analysis, the meat, milk, wool, fur, and other food products. This com- most commonly consumed foods included plant-based bination of factors was instrumental in the development such as eggplants, pears, lentils, garlic, and wheat. Findof Egyptian civilization, Pharaonic history, and tangible ings from this analysis suggested that ancient Egyptians food culture. Despite successive colonization by a myr- followed a mostly vegetarian diet [8]. Consistent with the iad of major foreign powers, Egypt largely maintained aforementioned findings, [9] maintained that the staple its diversified ethnic, language, and cultural identities, foodstuffs consumed by both poor and wealthy Egyptians as well as centuries of a meticulously preserved chrono- included bread and beer, which were often supplemented logical account of tangible food culture. According to the by green onions, vegetables, lentils, chickpeas, figs, and chronology of hieroglyphic and hieratic scripts, as well to a lesser extent meat, game birds, and fish, which conas various monuments and artifacts, Egypt is considered sidered a luxury food that was consumed mostly by royone of the oldest and preeminent civilizations in the East- als, nobilities and well-off Egyptians (Fig. 1). In related ern Mediterranean and North African regions. Egypt's but different research by [10] analyzed tissues of calcified history tracks back to around 5000 years ago. Although bones and teeth of ancient Egyptians who lived in Aswan, most of the Egyptian land is desert, the Nile River pro- then called Nubia in Upper Egypt. The findings suggested vided both ancient and present-day Egypt with a lifeline that they consumed imported food and cereals during of fertile land, transport system, irrigation system, rais- years of drought and famine under the rule of the 17th ing crops, cultivating construction materials, and fresh Dynasty in Upper Egypt from (1580 to 1550 BC). These drinking water. Most of the Egyptian geography is an arid findings support the argument that ancient Egyptians landscape; however, the Nile River Valley supplied Egypt consumed mainly a vegetarian diet.
with a soil-rich silt ideal for growing staple crops, chiefly The Pharaoh's role in ancient Egypt was not only the among them papyrus, wheat, and flaxseed. Throughout political head of the state or military commander but also its history, emmer wheat has been the main staple food the religious leader and deity. In this sacred position, the source for Egyptians [1 - 4]. Whereas ancient Egyptian Pharaoh wielded considerable influence on employing
Civilization is renowned for its architectural styles, colos- food in religious rituals. Throughout the dynastic rules of sal monuments, extravagant temples, and tombs such ancient Egypt, food offerings and banquets occupied an as the Great Pyramids of Giza, there is a lesser-known influential role in various social events, religious ceremoaspect of ancient Egyptian history that is understudied, nies, mummification rituals, and burial rites. Frequently which is ancient Egyptian food culture. served at ancient Egyptian banquets, including bread,
Ancient Egypt's gastronomy includes the methods of beef, goose, cheese, fish, beer, and an assortment of fruits ingredients choices, kitchen planning, cooking tools used, and vegetables (Fig. 1). Ancient Egyptians did not have banquet preparation, and consumption. The recorded a hieroglyphic word for "banquets." However, paintings historical evidence from the portrayals of ancient Egyp- found in tombs depicted that the Pharaohs and nobilitytian's daily life depicted on tombs and in hieroglyphic class Egyptians had extravagant feasts comparable to pretexts showed that the ancient Egyptians were especially sent-day banquets. Feasts or banquets were most likely particular about the type of food they consumed for two held to observe important social events and religious key reasons. The first was to achieve longevity in life, and occasions such as births, deaths, and weddings (Fig. 2).
the second was to prepare for their journey to their eter- Although various foods were served, meat dishes were nal life in the afterlife, which ancient Egyptians believed uncommon because they were scarcely available except it is a facsimile of their life on earth [5, 6]. As stated by for the Pharaohs and affluent Egyptians [7, 11].
[7], religious and customary beliefs wield a considerable
Role of food in preparation for the afterlife influence on dietary habits, particularly through prescribed food laws that regulate the type of permissible There is a consensus in the literature that in ancient or impermissible consumption of certain food items. A Egypt, food occupied an essential function as an integral team of French researchers examined the carbon atoms part of religious practices, culture, and social status. This in mummies that had lived in Egypt between (3500 BC food function was important in life, death, and the afterand 600 AD) to uncover what type of food they con- life. According to ancient Egyptians' beliefs, when they sumed. The study suggested that in ancient Egypt, there died, their souls would continue to exist in immortality
H alawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 3 of 13
Fig. 1 Ancient Egyptian food painting found in the Tomb of Menna, a high-ranking official during Egypt's New Kingdom over 3,000 years ago when
Amenhotep III was the Pharaoh of Egypt. This image was retrieved from URL: https:// eng. majal la. com/ node/ 190491/ cultu reanc ient- egypt ian- cuisi ne
Fig. 2 A painting depicting an ancient Egyptian banquet. This image was retrieved from URL: https:// www. pinte rest. co. uk/ pin/ 59391 22695 93637
909/ in the afterlife, which will be comparable to their lives provide sufficient food supplies to sustain their spirit in before death; however, their admission into the afterlife their afterlife. These requirements could be realized when has not yet been ensured because the deceased Phar- adequate preparations were made during a deceased peraohs must first navigate a precarious underworld passage son's lifetime [12]. In preparation for that journey, they and reckon with a final judgment before being permit- adorned their tombs and temples with images depictted access to the afterlife. If successful, they expected to ing a variety of food items as offerings to the deities as a
Halawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 4 of 13
gesture of atonement. They also decorated temple walls with colorful paintings of tables packed with pottery jars and bowls of a variety of their actual favorite food [13].
Fundamental to ancient Egyptian mythology was the belief in the afterlife and reincarnation. According to that belief, ancient Egyptian's average lifespan lasted only up to their forties, therefore, they believed in the concept of having eternal life in which they will continue to live in the afterlife after they die, where they will be resurrected to live for eternity. The belief in the afterlife motivated them to prepare well for the afterlife by erecting edificial tombs, monuments, temples, and elaborate great pyramids. They also stockpiled various food supplies Fig. 3 A broken jar containing a 3,200-year-old piece of halloumi and belongings in their tombs to ensure the food secu- cheese found in a high ranking Egyptian official's tomb discovered in rity of the deceased Pharaohs and other royalties in their 2018 by a team of archaeologists from the University of Catania, Sicily,
Italy, and Cairo University, Egypt. This image was retrieved from URL:
afterlife (Fig. 1). Research by [14] presented the results https:// www. bbc. com/ news/ world- africa- 45233 347
of lipid biomarkers and stable carbon isotope analyses of tissues and bandaging of mummies from the tomb of the high-ranking nobility "Yuya" and his wife "Tjuia"
(18th Dynasty, 1386 - 1349 BC). The results revealed that one of the ointments used in this funerary process was extracted from a tree related to the pistachio, which was profusely anointed over prime beef ribs before the deceased was buried in the Valley of the Kings at Thebes in Upper Egypt, which was the cradle of ancient Egyptian Civilization. Food, including meat, poultry, bread, cereals, fruit, jars of wine, beer, and oil were consigned into the "grave goods" to be available for the deceased in the afterlife. To underscore the significant role of food in preparedness for eventual death, it was a mythological belief that having meat and poultry placed in the tomb of the deceased from the highest ranks of ancient Egyptian society intended to ensure achieving the interminable preservation of their mummies while awaiting entering the afterlife.
Book of the Dead is approximately 3,000 years old.
Generally, the book was inscribed on a compendium of nearly 200 spells of ancient Egyptian funerary prayers, hymns, magic charms, or hieroglyphic formulas com- Fig. 4 Stela depicting food offerings for the afterlife found in a
Middle Kingdom tomb in ancient Egypt. This image was retrieved posed by high priests as a guide to the deceased to from URL: https:// www. metmu seum. org/ blogs/ now- at- the- met/ enter the afterlife. Further, the book intended to protect
2015/ food- and- feasts- in- middle- kingd om- egypt the deceased Pharoah or his queen and guarantee that they have all the necessities, including their belongings and food provisions to embark on their long journey navigating the mythical underworld into the afterlife the deceased's deeds in the underworld [16]. In prepara-
(Fig. 4). According to the Book of the Dead, the afterlife tion for entering the afterlife, the deceased person would doctrine was established on the belief that after death, normally need the same food and other belongings that the deceased will be reborn and live eternally in the they had possessed during their life before death. Food afterlife [15]. Subsequently, the soul of the deceased per- items and other personal possessions-known as "grave son who had lived their earthy life will be guided by the goods" were transferred to the tombs of the Pharaohs
"gods" to be reincarnated and eventually finds their way and wealthy nobles to provide them with sufficient provito the afterlife if they were successful in passing the final sions of food and drink in the afterlife. Bread, beer, and judgment by Osiris, the "god" of fertility and judge of dehydrated fruits, as well as luxury food items at the time
H alawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 5 of 13
such as beef, poultry, halloumi cheese, and fish, were The present-day Koshary (Arabic: يرشك) by far is the among ancient Egyptian's dietary needs to be placed with most popularly consumed among Egypt's national trathem in their tombs for consumption by the soul in the ditional dishes. It is an affordable and nutritional food afterlife (Figs. 1, 3, 4). The main purpose of "grave goods," sold in street carts. Egyptians considered it "the comincluding foodstuffs, was not necessarily intended to fort food of the poor." Whereas it originated as a breakboast about the deceased person's wealth or social sta- fast meal, currently, koshary is a meal that Egyptians tus but to provide them with the essentials they would eat for breakfast, lunch, dinner, and snacks [20]. Incipineed to continue living in the afterlife. A noteworthy ently, Koshary was a dish made at home by amalgamatillustration of the preparation for the afterlife by ancient ing leftover cooked rice, grains, pieces of thin pasta,
Egyptians is that archaeologists found 48 wooden cases and whatever other cooked grains or beans were availaof butchered cuts of beef and poultry in the tomb of the ble to add to the dish. In later years, koshary has develfamed Pharaoh Tutankhamun (a.k.a. King Tut) who ruled oped into the classic ingredients made of short
Egypt as a boy Pharaoh at the age of for nine years until macaroni, brown or yellow whole grain lentils, white his death between (c. 1332 - 1323 BC). His name in Hier- rice along with a spicy tomato sauce, and topped with oglyphics designates his deific status and authority as the cooked chickpeas and thinly sliced fried onions. It is living image of Amun-Ra, the "god" of sun and air [17, 18] served in specialty Koshary full-service sit-down res-
(Figs. 1, 3, 4). taurants or street kiosks in Cairo and other major
Egyptian cities (Fig. 5). Research on the nutritional valFood culture across ancient and contemporary ues of koshary suggested that cooking koshary ingrediEgypt ents - lentils, chickpeas, rice, and macaroni - enhanced
Historic documents and artifacts showed that the ancient the nutritional benefits of proteins and the digestibility
Egyptian diet concentrated on a variety of staple foods, factor compared to raw koshary ingredients. Especially, including whole wheat bread, beans, barley, cereals, cooked rice in koshary was found to possess a higher vegetables, and fruits. This food menu persuaded some digestibility factor than cooked whole lentils [21]. In
Egyptology researchers to argue that ancient Egyptians connection to ancient Egypt, lentil grains were discovmay mostly have followed a vegetarian diet. Juxtaposed ered in a tomb dating back to (2000 B.C.). Whole grain with this argument, archeological evidence showed that lentils are especially nutritious and healthful to conthey also consumed animal and game meat, albeit that sume. Whole grain lentils provide adequate measures was mainly available for the Pharaohs and wealthy upper- of dietary fiber, protein, carbohydrates, and minerals, class Egyptians (Figs. 1 and 4). Papyrus scrolls and tem- as well as other phytochemicals, including phenolic, ple murals illustrated that both men and women were phytic acid, and tannic acid. In addition, lentils provide engaged in cooking. In an open-fire kitchen, they pre- beneficial substitutes for a wide range of functional pared food through several cooking methods such as properties as a replacement for other cereal and legume frying, grilling, roasting, stewing, baking, and boiling. starches [22, 23].
However, men engaged in most of the food preparation in the temples and cooked for themselves while working in the fields [13]. Notably, numerous of the traditional foods that were consumed in the ancient Egyptian era are still being consumed in present-day Egypt; however, they have been adapted with different ingredients and recipes.
Some of the food items discussed in the present study in greater detail are modern-day Egyptian foods that have a lineage to foods dating back to ancient Egypt's food culture.
Koshary (also spelled koshari or kushari)
Historically, as described in the Egyptian Books of
Genesis, the modern-day koshary originated in ancient
Egypt, and was then called "Koshir." This ancient name denotes "Food of the rites of the gods." Koshir was a
Fig. 5 Present-day Egyptian koshary. This image was retrieved breakfast meal that incorporated an ingredient of whole from URL: https:// www. washi ngton post. com/ world/ 2022/ 12/ 26/ brown lentils, chickpeas, wheat grains, garlic, and egypt- econo my- infla tion- food- prices/ onions cooked together in an open fire in clay pots [19].
Halawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 6 of 13
Egyptian molokhia Egyptians believed that molokhia might be a wild poisonMolokhia (Arabic: ةيخولم) is a quintessentially traditional ous plant that should not be eaten. However, the Hyksos,
Egyptian vegetarian cuisine consumed widely by most a Semitic people who invaded and ruled Egypt between c.
Egyptians, including ancient Egyptians. For most Egyp- 1782 - c. 1570 BCE, compelled Egyptians to eat the pretians, molokhia has been for a long time considered a sumably poisonous plant (molokhia) as a means of intimsymbol of their homeland. It is a nutritious dark-green idation and punishment to control them [30, 31]. The leafy vegetable with small flat leaves cultivated and con- ancient Egyptians were forced to eat the plant but were sumed in several Middle Eastern and African countries not poisoned after all. From that time forward, molokhia as a thick gelatinous soup-like dish (Fig. 6). Botanically, developed into the Egyptians' most favored food.
molokhia is a summer-grown plant commonly known as Whether it is a family lunch, dinner, or festive occasion,
"Jute" or "Nalta jute," which is a member of a plant family molokhia always has a place at their dining tables. The known as "Malvaceae" of the hibiscus or mallow species second competing account that connects molokhia's oriof herbs and shrubs. Pharmacologically, its small leaves gin to the Pharaonic era was somewhat later known in are exploited as medicinal plants, usually administered to Egypt's ancient history. This account purports that the treat fever, aches and pain, chronic cystitis, swellings, and name molokhia originated from the word that means inflammation. Further, the plant possesses anti-inflam- "majestic" in hieroglyphics because it was an exclusive matory and immunomodulatory effects, as well as anti- meal served only to the Egyptian Pharaohs, royal famioxidation properties that are derived from the extract of lies, and the nobility class. The modern-day traditional molokhia leaves. Further, the plant was reported to pos- molokhia dish is cooked with finely minced molokhia sess demulcent, diuretic, galactagogue, purgative, and leaves, chicken or beef broth, ground coriander, and tonic attributes. Molokhia plant leaves have also been minced roasted garlic. It is usually served over rice or used as an ingredient in facial creams, lotions, hair ton- eaten with whole wheat pita bread together with either ics, and hand creams [24 - 27]. Nutritionally, molokhia is baked chicken or the more traditionally rabbit meat acclaimed as a "superfood" as it provides three times the (Fig. 6). In the northern city of Alexandria, Egypt, and calcium and phosphorous as kale, and four times the other coastal cities, instead of chicken or rabbit meat, amount of riboflavin. Additionally, molokhia provides molokhia is cooked with shrimp and is called in Arabic
(70%) of the recommended daily allowance (RDA) value (يربمج لب ةيخولم) "molokhia-bel-gambary" [32].
for vitamin C, and (25%) of the RDA of vitamin A, together with a multitude of other essential vitamins and Ancient Egyptian bread minerals [28]. These findings have been corroborated by
From the Pharaonic era up to the present time, bread has
[29] who found that the molokhia plant contains essential been the foremost staple in the Egyptians' diet, which nutrients, including carotenoids, polysaccharides, phenowas consumed daily by both upper-income and lowlics, minerals, proteins, some sugars, and the vitamins income Egyptians. The underpinning of the Ancient
B1, B2, C, and E.
Egyptians' diet centered mainly on bread consumption as
Molokhia has a historical connection to the Pharaonic the indispensable staple food for the proletarian class.
era. There are two divergent accounts connecting Bread (Arabic: زبخ, khobez) was primarily made using molokhia to that era. The first account claims that ancient flour produced by grinding raw grains such as barley or emmer wheat to make diverse types of bread products. In ancient Egypt, milled emmer wheat was commonly used in bread making; however, it was more challenging than most other wheat varieties to transmute into flour for making bread [5]. Hieroglyphic records revealed that there were 14 diverse types of bread making, chiefly among them whole wheat pita bread and sourdough bread (Fig. 7). Egyptology scholars postulated that ancient Egyptian families typically ate leavened pita-style bread at home and ate pot-baked bread during temple festivals and special occasions [33]. During the construction of the Great Pyramids of Giza, bread and beer
Fig. 6 Cooked molokhia with an Egyptian-style recipe (right-side rations were used as a currency of payment to the conillustration) and molokhia plant leaves (left-side illustration). This struction workers who contributed to building the Pyraimage was retrieved from URL: https:// www. inside- egypt. com/ mids. In present-day Egypt, the essential bread that the the- famous- molok hia- soup. html preponderance of Egyptians eat is a modern version of
H alawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 7 of 13
Fig. 7 Royal bakery of Pharoah Ramesses III was found in his tomb in the Valley of the Kings. Several types of bread, including loaves shaped in the image of animals are depicted. This image was retrieved from URL: http:// www. histo rical cooki ngpro ject. com/ 2014/ 12/ guest- post- ancie nt- egypt ian- bread- by. html
Arabic denotes "living." Hieroglyphics and mural portrayals found in temples suggest that 5,000 years ago, ancient
Egyptians were pioneers in the formation of natural microbial contaminants made of flour and fruit juices containing fructose to produce yeast. This yeast was used as a leavening agent to make leavened bread by the production of carbon dioxide. They also employed their knowledge of producing yeast and bread-making to brew an acidic beer beverage called (Boozah, Arabic: هزوب) from a lightly baked loaf of germinated grains [34]. Another method of brewing Ancient Egyptian beer was by amalgamating cooked and uncooked malt with water and the mixture was strained to free it from husk before inoculating it with yeast [35].
Fig. 8 Present-day whole wheat pita bread (Eish Baladi, Arabic: شيع To produce flour for bread making, according to
يدلب) which is a modern version of the bread eaten by ancient archaeological discoveries, ancient Egyptians employed a
Egyptians. This image was retrieved from URL: https:// www. memph simple grain grinding quern, which is constructed from a istou rs. com/ Egypt/ Egypt- Wikis/ Egypt- Infor mation/ wiki/ Egypt granite stone mill for grinding emmer wheat and other ian- Food grains. Typically, the quern was assembled from two circular or flat stones, the upper of which is manually rotated or rubbed against the lower saddle stone (Fig. 9).
the bread that their ancient progenitors ate thousands of To bake bread, they placed it in an open-topped clay oven years ago and was similarly made from whole wheat or inside fire-heated cylindrical-shaped bread clay molds.
called (Eish Baladi, Egyptian Arabic: يدلب شيع) (Fig. 8). To Archaeological artifacts showed that both men and emphasize the vital importance of bread as a staple food women contributed to making bread; however, when for Egyptians' daily diet, the word "Eish" in Egyptian men were engaged in performing other field tasks,
Halawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 8 of 13
chants were calling for "bread, freedom, social justice," especially the demand for a structural policy change regarding bread, the symbol of sustenance for tens of millions of Egyptians. However, the upsurge in the production of wheat flour, and the corresponding increase in bread consumption is rising at alarmingly higher rates, leading to an increase in Egyptian wheat imports, which is creating a heavy burden on Egypt's economy and trade balance deficient [39, 40].
Ancient and present‐day Egyptian halloumi cheese
Recent archaeological discoveries have revealed that
Ancient Egyptians consumed a type of cheese called
"halloumi" cheese (Fig. 3). Founded on recent conclusive archaeological evidence, ancient Egyptians engaged
Fig. 9 Ancient Egyptian rotary saddle quern used to grind emmer wheat and barley to produce flour for baking bread. This image was in the cheese-making process over 5,000 years ago durretrieved from URL: https:// foodp roces singh istory. blogs pot. com/ ing the rule of the first Egyptian Dynasty. The earliest
2018/ 01/ milli ng- in- ancie nt- egypt. html evidence of cheese-making in Egypt was murals that depicted images of the manufacturing of cheese. Among this evidence, archeologists discovered two alabaster jars containing images of cheese at Saqqara, the first Capiwomen customarily were the grain millers. Images of tal City of ancient Egypt neighboring the modern-day women milling grain have been discovered in the tombs
Capital City of Egypt, Cairo [41, 42]. In addition, more of the later Old Kingdom (c.2575 - 2510 BC) to the recently, in 2018, a team of Egyptology archaeologists ancient Middle Kingdom (c.2030 - 1640 BC) (Fig. 9) [36, from the University of Catania, Sicily, Italy, and Cairo
37]. As a demonstration of the important role that bread
University, Egypt unearthed a broken jar containing a played in the social life of Ancient Egyptians, an archeo3,200-year-old piece of halloumi cheese found in a highlogical analysis of the Pharaonic settlement in the
Amarna (Arabic: ةنرامعلا; Al-Amanah) Workers Village ranking Egyptian official's tomb that dates back to the
26th and 27th Egyptian dynasties (664 - 404 BCE) (Fig. 3).
that was founded around (1350 BC) at the directive of the
Historically, there has been an argument that meat and
Pharaoh Akhenaten showed that when they were procheese were consumed in ancient Egypt; however, this vided with raw bread-making ingredients, the settlement consumption was primarily by the Pharaohs, high priests, households were mostly self-sufficient, and those houseand upper-class wealthy Egyptians at the time [43 - 45].
holds collaborated in the milling of wheat grains into
The tradition of cheese making and consumption conflour and baking various types of bread for the settletinued from ancient Egypt to modern-day Egypt. This ment's consumption needs [38]. In present-day Egypt, continuity defines a notable aspect of Egypt's 5000 years bread continues to play a substantial role in the political, of contextual food culture and history. The modern-day economic, and social life of all Egyptians. Egypt has
Egyptian cheese (Egyptian Arabic: ةنبج "gebnah") is usubecome the foremost largest importer of wheat in the ally milky white and has been an important staple of the world to feed its nearly 105 million Egyptians. The
Egyptian diet. The Egyptian white cheese is often served importation and consumption of wheat grains to produce with breakfast. Cheese is also incorporated into making bread have been increasingly expanding to meet the corvarious traditional dishes and added to numerous ingreresponding demand of its population growth of nearly dients in making a variety of pastries and desserts [41].
(2.6) million people annually. The outcome of this popuThere are several types of white halloumi cheese chiefly lation growth led to a considerable rise in the amount of among them the (Akkawi, Arabic: يواكع) cheese, which is wheat consumed by (0.185) million tons per million peogenerally popular in Egypt and the Levant. The modernple. Research findings suggested that the increase in day halloumi cheese is comparable to feta cheese, which wheat imports rose from (5.1) million tons in 1995 to is traditionally made from pasteurized sheep, goat, buf-
(8.6) million tons in 2016 with an uptick of (3.5) million falo, or cow's milk. It is usually soft-textured and salted tons in nearly two decades. One of the key drivers of the in brine with a smooth, piquant flavor. It has a distinctly
2011 "Tahrir Square" Egyptian revolution and the Janumild salty and milky taste (Fig. 10). Halloumi cheese is ary 1977 "beard uprising," among other grievances, was versatile and commonly eaten with fresh fruit, sliced bread availability, prices, and quality. The revolution's fresh tomatoes and cucumber, and olive oil. It can also be
H alawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 9 of 13
Fig. 11 Present-day kariesh cheese originated in ancient Egypt
Fig. 10 Present-day Egyptian halloumi (a.k.a. akkawi) cheese. This between 3200 and 332 BC. This image was retrieved from URL:
image was retrieved from URL: https:// www. araba merica. com/ https:// spinn eys- egypt. com/ en/ produ cts/ qurai sh- cheese#/ the- 11- chees es- of- the- arab- world/
Customarily, kariesh cheese is usually eaten with whole grilled and combined in a sandwich of pocket pita bread wheat pita bread, some olive oil, and slices of fresh or sprinkled over salads. Halloumi cheese can also be tomato. Conventionally, kariesh cheese was produced by combined with grilled mushrooms, avocado, or chunky a rudimentary method of the random fermentation of salsa [46]. According to 2000 estimates, per capita, Egyp- milk that impaled its cream layer by applying rapid gravtians consumed approximately (4.4) kilograms (9.7 lb.) of ity force. Currently, however, it is produced through sevcheese. In 2002, it was projected that more than one- eral modern manufacturing processes employing third of Egyptian milk yield was used in the production of ultrafiltration skimmed milk, adding certain bacterial the traditional white salt-brained feta cheese. Most of the cultures (probiotic bacteria), and enzymatic coagulation.
cheese in Egypt is manufactured in the northern port city Similar to halloumi cheese, kariesh cheese can be traced of Dumyat, which is recognized as the Egyptian capital back to the Pharaonic era spanning from 3200 BC to 332
city of feta cheese production [47, 48]. BC, where the availability of certain pottery jars and pots
Another type of popular Egyptian cheese is kariesh facilitated making it, as well as a type of Nile River-grown cheese (Egyptian Arabic: شيرق ةنبج). It is one of the indige- reed that was commonly employed as mats for draining nous white soft cheese types that originated in ancient milk serum and shaping the fermented skimmed milk
Egypt that is comparable to the texture and taste of cot- into kariesh cheese molds of different shapes and sizes tage cheese. Karsh cheese is a low-fat and mild-tasted (Fig. 11) [49 - 52].
cheese made of acid-coagulated skimmed milk collected
Discussion from cow's milk, buffalo milk, fermented buttermilk, or sour defatted milk. Traditionally, it is produced in Egyp- Throughout human history, food has been the only tian rural areas in dairy farmlands, especially in small source of nutrition and life sustainability. It provides farm communities operated by low-to-middle-income indispensable physiological, biochemical, psychological, villagers who depend mostly on kariesh cheese for their and sociological functions that are essential to maindiet as a nutritious source of high-value protein and low- taining good health and salubrious longevity. Over the fat at an affordable cost. Additional to its high protein past 5000 years, the Egyptian traditional food system content, kariesh cheese contains most of the skim milk provided a nutritionally balanced diet and largely uninproperties, including a small amount of lactose, some terrupted food security [53]. Ancient Egypt's traditional water, soluble vitamins, calcium, and phosphorus. food culture reflected Egypt's food diversity, contribution
Because of the increased health awareness of the con- to developing civilization, religious beliefs, and natural sumer, kariesh cheese has become quite popular owing to resources such as the Nile River. Food was fundamental its manifold health benefits, as it is comparatively a defat- to ancient Egyptians' mythological concept of the afterted cheese consumed widely by most Egyptians. Kariesh life and preparation for ensuring a successful transition cheese is often recommended for people who are suffer- into eternal life. Modern elemental isotopic analysis ing from heart disease, high LDL cholesterol, hyperlipi- informed of the type of diet that ancient Egyptians condemia, and obesity. Its popularity can be ascribed to its sumed [8]. Juxtaposing the results of this isotopic analyfreshness, distinct flavor, and relatively lower price. sis with the present-day Egyptians' diet, cognate findings
Halawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 10 of 13
corroborated that many of the food ingredients that of food in ancient Egypt was to employ it in performing were consumed during the Pharaonic era have transi- sacrificial rituals and festivities. Sacrifices had been pertioned into contemporary Egyptian food culture. Find- formed by ancient Egyptian and other ancient cultures ings from the present study suggested that staple food by using food, humans, animals, or material objects as a items that were consumed by ancient Egyptians, illus- necessary spiritual practice to bridge the hierarchical and trated in tombs, and engraved on temple murals are still physical distance between humanity and divine beings or being consumed-albeit with present-day modifications "gods," as well as to preserve ancient Egyptian beliefs and by present-day Egyptians. Chiefly among some of the food cultural heritage in the afterlife. In ancient religions traditional foods that transitioned from ancient Egypt to such as polytheism in Egypt, in religious terms, to make contemporary Egypt are koshary, molokhia, whole wheat a sacrifice translates into "to make sacred" to move closer bread, halloumi cheese, and kariesh cheese (Figs. 3, 5, 6, 8, toward a divine power or "god" [60 - 62]. Ancient Egyp10, 11). Further, findings from the present research dem- tians sacrificed food and animals to "make them sacred" onstrated that nearly all the food consumed by ancient to be offered to a divine being as a demonstration of their
Egyptians, especially the proletariats, was plant-based, devotion and commitment to their "gods." This was parsuggesting that, unlike present-day Egyptians, ancient ticularly of significant importance in preparing for the
Egyptians mainly adopted a vegetarian diet. Archaeologi- fabled journey into entering the afterlife, where favorite cal evidence discovered "grave goods" found in temples food and mummified pets were buried alongside the and tombs, which showed that meat consumption was deceased Pharaohs and privileged members of the nobillimited and is a relatively recent phenomenon. In ancient ity class in their tombs.
Egypt, animal meat, domesticated fowl, game bird meat,
Conclusion and fish had then considered luxury food items that were consumed primarily by the Pharaohs, nobility class, high Egypt has formerly been described as "the breadbasket of priests, and wealthy Egyptians (Figs. 1, 4). Rome." During the Roman Empire era, Egypt produced
Vegetarianism was a widely common dietary prac- an estimated surplus of nearly equivalent to 26 miltice in most ancient cultures, except in nomadic popu- lion metric tons of wheat that were exported to Rome lations, where hunting and fishing were a way of life to and other regions of the Mediterranean Sea as one of secure food sources for subsistence. Archaeological evi- their main grain suppliers. Currently, Egypt has become dence revealed that agriculture and irrigation channels the largest wheat grain importer country in the world.
existed from an early stage in Egypt's history. Cereal During the past two decades, Egypt's agricultural secfoods, fruits, and vegetables constituted the staple foods tor and food sufficiency, particularly producing staple that ancient Egyptians subsisted on from the pre-dynas- grain crops, have been encountering multiple challenges tic period up to the present time. Even for wealthy peo- triggered by water shortage and climate change issues, ple, this staple food means having a bounty and variety including declining grain yields per acre and a reducof different pieces of bread, various kinds of vegetables, tion in financial returns. This significant shift is associand exotic types of fruits consumed more frequently ated with the current issues of the anthropogenic impact with other ingredients amalgamated. In the Old King- of global climate change and the impact of global warmdom (ca. 2649 - 2130 B.C.), the diet was mainly based on ing coupled with the damming of rivers on the sociodebread, vegetables, fruit, milk, cheese, and fish. However, mographic structure, as well as food and water security.
some tangible images of the slaughtering of animals and Research findings suggest that prospective staple food hunting for game birds were found depicted in tombs availability causes major concerns. Global climate change and temples (Fig. 1) [54 - 56]. Whereas most of the pro- and the construction of mega hydrological projects along letarian class of ancient Egyptians consumed a mainly the Nile River, namely the Aswan High Dam in southern vegetarian-based diet [8 - 10], recent tomographic imag- Egypt and the Renaissance Dam in northern Ethiopia ing (CT) analyses of mummies revealed that was not the estimated to cause adverse effects on the vital agriculcase for the Pharaonic royalty and high priests, as well as tural sector, food security, and adequate staple food supand their family members whose daily food intake would plies, especially wheat, barley, and corn grains, which are have included high levels of animal-based saturated fat, essential for the production of flour for making bread for which contributed to elevated rates of incidence of mod- the increasingly growing Egyptian population.
erate-to-severe cases of atherosclerosis found in the 58 The dwindling food subsidy allocation in Egypt, espeexamined mummies in three cognate studies, including a cially the heavily subsidized bread prices, has been the
30-year-old princess. These findings represent the earliest most intractable challenge. Findings from an empirical evidence of coronary atherosclerosis found in humankind analysis reported that Egypt's vulnerable food security is
[57 - 59]. Religiously, one of the fundamental functions particularly dependent on food imports, especially grains
H alawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 11 of 13
which constitute over (50%) of food product demands. the significant findings concerning the key role of food
Leading subsidies are provided for rationed sugar and culture in ancient Egypt is that bread was monetized as cooking oil (23%) and unrationed bread and grain flour a currency in exchange for services and was tendered to
(77%). Whereas these subsidies improve food security remunerate wages to the construction workers who built for low and moderate-income Egyptians, they are not the Great Pyramids of Giza. In closing, it is reasonable to targeted to benefit the disadvantaged groups and are conclude that because of the existence of the Nile River exposed to considerable marketplace manipulation. To flowing carrying fertile silt through the mainly barren manage the projected global climate changes, including desert, Egypt has benefited considerably from the Nile's the diminishing water resources from the overstressed fresh water, long-standing agriculture, and diverse food
Nile River, there should be a long-term strategy to deal resources better than other comparable ancient civilizawith global climate change and implement water insuf- tions. This eonian history of food culture has contributed ficiency adaptation interventions. Recent research to the development of an enduring 5000-year civilization.
maintains that Egypt would benefit from adopting and
Acknowledgements implementing effective adaptation strategies to mitigate The author would like to express his gratitude to the editors and reviewers the negative impact on several staple food crops that are for their valuable and constructive comments concerning the manuscript to meet the standards and requirements of publication in the Journal of Ethnic imperative dietary sources to the sizable food-insecure
Foods.
Egyptian population. In response to the potential impact of food insecurity, an analysis of climate change risks for Author's information
Abdelhadi Halawa is an Associate Professor at Millersville University, Millerssecuring staple crops in the most affected food-insecure ville, Pennsylvania, USA. He is also a non-resident Visiting Scholar and Lead regions in Egypt was conducted to identify several adap- Researcher at The Key Research Institute of Yellow River Civilization and tation priorities based on statistical crop models and cli- Sustainable Development, Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan Province, China.
His principal research interests lie in the fields of public health issues, wellness mate change projections for 2030. Results of the analysis promotion, global food culture, and a special interest in eating behaviors, food suggest that Egypt, without necessary adaptation meas- consumption, and nutritional epidemiology.
ures, will probably experience long-term adverse effects
Author contributions on several staple food crops that are essential nutritional
The author read and approved the final manuscript.
sources for tens of millions of Egyptians [63 - 70].
The present study has presented evidence that Egypt Funding
The author declares that this study is self-funded and has not received any has 5000 years of well-recorded, tangible, and iconofunds from funding institutions.
graphical history of food culture, corroborated by numerous archaeological discoveries such as monuments, Availability of data and materials
Data sharing does not apply to this article, as no datasets were generated or colorfully engraved murals, and paintings portraying the analyzed during the current study.
dietary behavior of ancient Egyptians. Most of this evidence was found in temples, and the food items stockDeclarations piled in tombs in preparation for entering the afterlife
(Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4]. Further, the present study underscored Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
the close association between food and religious rituals, especially as a sacrifice for the "gods" and nourishment for the soul of the deceased on their transition into the Received: 6 November 2022 Accepted: 26 April 2023
afterlife, which was especially of spiritual significance in ancient Egypt. This historical patrimony highlights the considerable role and influence that food played in the
References life of ancient Egyptians not only for its physiological
1. Kitchen KA. The chronology of ancient Egypt. World Archaeol.
nutritive functions to sustain life, but also for its pivotal 2010;23(2):201 - 8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00438 243. 1991. 99801 72.
role in the polytheistic beliefs and mythological rituals 2. Redford DB. The Oxford encyclopedia of ancient Egypt. Oxford: Oxford to prepare the deceased Pharaohs to transition success- University; 2005.
3. Redford DB. Egypt, Canaan, and Israel in ancient times. Princeton: Princefully into immortalization in the afterlife. This was done ton University Press; 1992.
to ensure that they have adequate sustenance and belong- 4. Roebuck C. The World of Ancient Times. New York: Charles Schribner's
Sons Publishing; 1966.
ings they will need for their journey into immortality.
5. Mehdawy M, Hussein A. In The Pharaoh's Kitchen: Recipes from Ancient
The present study further illustrated the significant influ- Egypt's Enduring Food Traditions. Cairo, Egypt: American University in ence that the ancient Egyptian food culture has on the Cairo Press, 2010. Available from: http:// www. jstor. org/ stable/ j. ctt15
m7mzx.3
present-day Egyptian food culture as various food ingre6. Pinch G. Egyptian mythology: a guide to the gods, goddesses, and tradidients consumed during the Pharaonic period are still tions of ancient Egypt. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2004.
being consumed in contemporary times as well. One of
Halawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 12 of 13
7. Kwon DY, Tamang JP. Religious ethnic food. J Ethnic Foods. 2015;2(2):45 - 33. Roberts D. Ancient Egypt: Egypt's Old Kingdom. National Geographic
90. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jef. 2015. 05. 001. Magazine; 1995. https:// natio nalge ograp hicba ckiss ues. com/ produ ct/
8. Touzeau A, et al. Diet of ancient Egyptians inferred from stable isotope natio nal- geogr aphic- janua ry- 1995/ systematics. J Archaeol Sci. 2014;46:114 - 24. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jas. 34. Mohamed E. The ancient Egyptian bread and fermentation. Microbial
2014. 03. 005. Biosyst. 2020;5(1):52 - 3. https:// doi. org/ 10. 21608/ mb. 2020. 99522.
9. LaBorde S. Following the Sun: A Practical Guide to Egyptian Religion, 35. Samuel D. Investigation of Ancient Egyptian baking and brewing methRevised Edition,lulu.com Publishing (2017). ods by correlative microscopy. Science. 1996;273(5274):488 - 90. https://
10. Al-Khafif GD, El-Banna R. Reconstructing ancient Egyptian diet through doi. org/ 10. 1126/ scien ce. 273. 5274. 488.
bone elemental analysis using LIBS (Qubbet el Hawa Cemetery). Biomed 36. Samuel D. Experimental grinding and Ancient Egyptian flour production.
Res Int. 2015;2015(281056):1 - 7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2015/ 281056. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2010.
11. Sanders A. What Kinds of Foods & Drinks Were Served at Banquets in 37. Milling in ancient Egypt. History of food processing; 2018. https:// foodp
Ancient Egypt? 2022. Available from: https:// class room. synon ym. com/ roces singh istory. blogs pot. com/ 2018/ 01/ milli ng- in- ancie nt- egypt. html kinds- foods- drinks- were- served- banqu ets- ancie nt- egypt- 15832. html 38. Samuel D. Bread making and social interactions at the Amarna Work12. Williams AR. Packing Food for the Hereafter in Ancient Egypt. National men's Village. Egypt World Archaeol. 1999;31(1):121 - 44.
Geographic; 2015. Available from: https:// www. natio nalge ograp hic. com/ 39. Khalil YMM, Abd El-Ghani SS, Mansour TGI. A standard analysis of Egyptian cultu re/ artic le/ packi ng- food- for- the- herea fter- in- ancie nt- egypt foreign trade structure for wheat. Bull Natl Res Centre. 2020;44(20):1 - 7.
13. Hansen NB. Food in Ancient Egypt: What Did the Egyptians Eat? The https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s42269- 020- 0273-9.
Collector; 2022. Available from: https:// www. theco llect or. com/ food- ancie 40. Frerichs S. Egypt's neoliberal reforms and the moral economy of bread.
nt- egypt/ Rev Radical Political Econ. 2016;48:610 - 32. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 04866
14. Clark KA, Ikram S, Evershed RP. Organic chemistry of balms used in 13415 603158.
the preparation of pharaonic meat mummies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 41. Lucas A. Ancient Egyptian materials and industries 1926. Whitefish: Kes2013;110(51):20392 - 5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1073/ pnas. 13151 60110. singer Publishing; 2003.
15. Taylor J. Journey through the afterlife: ancient Egyptian book of the dead. 42. Kindstedt P. Cheese and culture. White River Junction: Chelsea Green
Cambridge: Harvard University Press; 2013. Publishing; 2012.
16. Mojsov B. The ancient Egyptian underworld in the tomb of Sety I: Sacred 43. Dunhill J. 2,600-year-old halloumi discovered in Ancient Egyptian tomb.
books of eternal life. Massachusetts Rev. 2001;42(4):489 - 506. Life Science; https:// www. iflsc ience. com/2- 600- year- old- hallo umi- disco
17. Amin B. Five foods the ancient Egyptians used to eat. Middle East Eye; vered- in- ancie nt- egypt ian- tomb- 65398
2022. Available from: https:// www. middl eeast eye. net/ disco ver/ egypt- 44. Ancient Egypt: Cheese discovered in a 3,200-year-old tomb. BBC News;
ancie nt- five- foods- eaten 2018. https:// www. bbc. com/ news/ world- africa- 45233 347
18. Mark JJ. Grave Goods in Ancient Egypt. World History Encyclopedia; 2017. 45. Greco E, El-Aguizy O, Ali MF, et al. Proteomic analyses on an ancient
Available from: https:// www. world histo ry. org/ artic le/ 1049/ grave- goods- Egyptian cheese and biomolecular evidence of brucellosis. Anal Chem.
in- ancie nt- egypt/ 2018;90(16):9673 - 6.
19. McClellan M. Ancient Egyptian chronology and the book of genesis. 46. Penn L. The 11 kinds of cheese of the Arab World; 2021. https:// www.
Answers Res J. 2011;4:127 - 59. araba merica. com/ the- 11- chees es- of- the- arab- world/
20. Galloway L. Why 2020 is the year to visit Cairo. BBC Travel; 47. Tamime AY. Brined cheeses. 1st ed. New York: Wiley; 2006.
2020. Available from: https:// www. carav an- serai. com/ 48. Robinson RK, Tamime AY. Feta and related cheeses. Cambridge: Woodbbc- travel- why- 2020- is- the- year- to- visit- cairo/ head Publishing; 1991.
21. Shekib LAH, Zoueil ME, Youssef MM, Safwat MM. Amino acid composi- 49. Todaro A, Adly FA, Omar OA. History, processing and quality enhancetion and In vitro digestibility of lentil and rice proteins and their mixture ment of traditional Egyptian Kariesh cheese: a review. Food Sci Technol.
(Koshary). Food Chem. 1986;20(1):61 - 7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0308- 2013;1(1):1 - 6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 13189/ fst. 2013. 010101.
8146(86) 90167-6. 50. El-Salam M, Omar M. Microstructure of Kariesh cheese. J Dairy Res.
22. Joshi M, Timilsena Y, Adhikari B. Global production, processing and utiliza- 1985;52(2):299 - 301. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S0022 02990 00241 71.
tion of lentil: a review. J Integr Agric. 2017;16(12):2898 - 913. https:// doi. 51. Fayed AE, Farahat AM, Metwally AE, Emam MS. Health stimulating org/ 10. 1016/ S2095- 3119(17) 61793-3. properties of the most popular soft cheese in Egypt Kariesh made using
23. Jarpa-Parra M. Lentil protein: a review of functional properties and food skimmed milk UF-retentate and probiotics. Acta Sci Pol Technol Aliment.
application. An overview of lentil protein functionality. Int J Food Sci 2014;13(4):359 - 73. https:// doi. org/ 10. 17306/J. AFS. 2014.4.3.
Technol. 2018;53:892 - 903. 52. Awada RA, Salama WF, Ragb WA. Enhancing yield and acceptability of
24. Ahmed F. Nutraceutical potential of molokhia (Corchorus olitorius l.): a Kareish cheese made of reformulated milk. Ann Agric Sci. 2015;60(1):87 - versatile green leafy vegetable. Pharmacog Res. 2021;13(1):801 - 12. 93. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. aoas. 2015. 03. 004.
25. Lee HB, Oh MJ, Do MH, Kim YS, Park HY. Molokhia leaf extract prevents 53. Hassan WH. Food habits of the Egyptians: newly emerging trends. EMHJ gut inflammation and obesity. J Ethnopharmacol. 2020;257:112866. Eastern Mediterr Health J. 2004;10(6):898 - 915.
26. Berry PE. Malvaceae. Encyclopedia Britannica; 2015. https:// www. brita 54. Nordström K, Coff C, Jönsson H, Nordenfelt L, Görman U. Food nnica. com/ plant/ Malva ceae. Accessed 1 Oct 2022 and health: individual, cultural, or scientific matters? Genes Nutr.
27. Simopoulos AP. Plants in human health and nutrition policy. World 2013;8(4):357 - 63. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s12263- 013- 0336-8.
Review of Nutrition and Dietetics. 1st Ed. Basel: Switzerland; 2003. 55. Alcock JP. Food in the ancient world: food through history. Annotated.
28. Eat like a pharaoh with the famous molokhia soup! Inside Egypt; 2018. Santa Barbara: Greenwood Publishing Group; 2005.
https:// www. inside- egypt. com/ the- famous- molok hia- soup. html 56. Saffirio L. Food and dietary habits in ancient Egypt. J Hum Evol.
29. Helaly A, Alkharpotly AE, Mady E, Craker LE. Characterization of four 1972;1(3):297 - 305. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0047- 2484(72) 90065-6.
molokhia (Corchorus olitorius) landraces by morphology and chemistry. 57. David AR, Kershaw A, Heagerty A. Atherosclerosis and diet in ancient
Journal of Medicinally Active Plants. 2017;5(2):1 - 6. https:// doi. org/ 10. Egypt. Lancet. 2010;375(9716):718 - 9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s01407275/ R52F7 KMD. 6736(10) 60294-2.
30. Morenz LD, Popko L. The second intermediate period and the New 58. Allam AH, Thompson RC, Wann LS, et al. Atherosclerosis in ancient EgypKingdom. In: Lloyd AB, editor. A companion to ancient Egypt. New York: tian mummies: the Horus study. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011;4(4):315 -
Wiley-Blackwell; 2010. p. 101 - 19. 27. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jcmg. 2011. 02. 002.
31. Mark J. 2017. Hyksos. World History Encyclopedia; 2017. https:// www. 59. Allam AH, Thompson RC, Wann LS, Miyamoto MI, Thomas GS. Computed world histo ry. org/ Hyksos/ tomographic assessment of atherosclerosis in ancient Egyptian mum32. Reda A. The Story of our food: The curious history of Egyptian molokhia; mies. JAMA. 2009;302(19):2091 - 4. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1001/ jama. 2009.
2020. https:// scoop empire. com/ the- story- of- our- food- the- curio us- histo 1641.
ry- of- egypt ian- molok hia/ 60. El Mahi T. Food customs and cultural taboos. Sudan J Paediatr.
2013;13(1):90 - 5.
H alawa Journal of Ethnic Foods (2023) 10:11 Page 13 of 13
61. Ikram S. Animals, Egyptian sacred. In: Bagnall RS, Brodersen K, Champion
CB, Erskine A, Huebner SR, editors. The encyclopedia of ancient history.
Berlin: Springer; 2012.
62. Agai JM. The role of the ancient Egyptians' beliefs in the afterlife in preserving the ancient Egyptian cultural heritage. J Languages Culture.
2020;11(1):17 - 23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5897/ JLC20 19. 0515.
63. Sabine RH. Climate change in the breadbasket of the Roman Empire:
explaining the decline of the Fayum Villages in the third century CE. Stud
Late Antiq. 2020;4(4):486 - 518. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1525/ sla. 2020.4. 4. 486.
64. Elmorshdy SS, Jimin W, Zhiquan H. Why the world's food basket became the largest grains importer country? Comparative statement on main crops: Self-sufficiency in Egypt and China. J Agric Sci. 2016;8(6):94. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5539/ jas. v8n6p 94.
65. Baig MB, Straquadine GS, Qureshi AM, Hajiyev A, Abou HAF. Sustainable agriculture and food security in Egypt: implications for innovations in agricultural extension. In: Behnassi M, Pollmann O, Gupta H, editors.
Climate change, food security, and natural resource management. Cham:
Springer; 2019.
66. Christoforidou M, Borghuis G, Seijger C, et al. Food security under water scarcity: a comparative analysis of Egypt and Jordan. Food Sec.
2023;15:171 - 85. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s12571- 022- 01310-y.
67. Löfgren H, El-Said M. Food subsidies in Egypt: reform options, distribution, and welfare. Food Policy. 2001;26:65 - 83. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/
S0306- 9192(00) 00030-0.
68. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Egypt's national strategy for adaptation to climate change and disaster risk Reduction:
2011 - 2031, FAO-LEX Database; 2011. Egypt's National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction|FAOLEX
69. Fahim MA, Hassanein MK, Khalil AA, Abou Hadid AF. Climate change adaptation needs for food security in Egypt. Nat Sci. 2013;11(12):68 - 74.
70. Shahat AK. Climate change and the social history of food in ancient
Egypt: between humanities and life sciences. California Dig Lib UCLA.
2021;7:21 - 4.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
RReeaaddyy ttoo ssuubbmmiitt yyoouurr rreesseeaarrcchh ?? CChhoooossee BBMMCC aanndd bbeenneeffiitt ffrroomm::
- fast, convenient online submission
- thorough peer review by experienced rese archers in your field
- rapid publication on acceptance
- support for research data, including large and complex data types
- gold Open Access which fosters wider collaboration and increased citations
- maximum visibility for your research: over 100M website views per year
At BMC, research is always in progress.
Learn more biomedcentral.com/submissions